Title: A Geometric Perspective on Stabilizing Value Conflict Resolution

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.17946v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Jul 2026 02:16:00 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# A Geometric Perspective on Stabilizing Value Conflict Resolution 

## Saket Reddy 1,2 Andy Liu 31Supervised Program for Alignment Research (SPAR) 

> 2

## University of Illinois - Urbana-Champaign, saketr3@illinois.edu 

> 3

## Carnegie Mellon University, andyliu@andrew.cmu.edu 

## Abstract 

Large Language Models (LLMs) often struggle to navigate value conflicts when trained with the compressed scalar rewards of Reinforce-ment Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF). To address this challenge, we investigate how chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning can help im-prove performance in this domain. Geomet-rically, we show that CoT correlates with fur-ther smoothing the model’s loss landscape in its sharpest direction, helping resolve the op-timization instability of traditional scalar re-wards. We also demonstrate via relevant down-stream benchmarks that value conflict-focused CoT may generalize to different kinds of moral reasoning, demonstrating that this CoT has the potential to be an effective mechanism for bet-ter moral reasoning. To capitalize on this poten-tial, we create a new value conflict-focused CoT design that further smooths the sharpest direc-tion of the loss landscape and increases moral reasoning performance. This finding shows that explicitly modifying and improving the design of reasoning dynamics offers a promis-ing avenue for improving model performance on user requests with complex value conflicts, advancing pluralistic alignment in LLMs. 1

## 1 Introduction 

The dominant alignment paradigm, Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022), maps human preferences to scalar re-wards. However, real-world user requests often re-quire navigating diverse and frequently conflicting values, such as balancing helpfulness with harm-lessness (Bai et al., 2022). When models are forced to optimize these contradictory constraints simul-taneously through scalar rewards, model behavior can become unstable. In deployment, this inability to effectively resolve value conflicts often mani-fests as flawed moral reasoning (Bao et al., 2026) 

> 1We release our dataset and code.

and unpredictable breakdowns in safety guardrails (Su et al., 2026). While chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning has been shown to improve alignment robustness (Guan et al., 2024), we still do not understand the mechanism. To investigate at a deeper level how CoT can help resolve competing values, we first apply a geometric analysis, where we find that CoT correlates with further smoothing the model’s loss landscape in its sharpest direction beyond the ef-fects of supervised fine-tuning (SFT), helping miti-gate the instability caused by direct scalar reward training. We then apply a performance analysis, where we find that value conflict-focused CoT may generalize to other kinds of moral reasoning. This performance increase is within the margin of er-ror, but the overall trend of performance increase is consistent, showing that value conflict-focused CoT has the potential to be an effective tool for better moral reasoning. We further explore the effects of modifying the design of reasoning dynamics. Value conflict res-olution in Large Language Models (LLMs) can be thought of similarly to geometric frustration: a physical phenomenon from condensed matter physics that occurs when a system’s constraints cannot be satisfied simultaneously, leading to a rugged and spiky energy landscape (Kim et al., 2023). When a scalar reward model forces a pol-icy to optimize for mutually exclusive values with-out a resolution mechanism, the model can be thought of as experiencing similar frustration. Ge-ometric frustration is often resolved via annealing: a thermodynamic process of heating the system to a high temperature, followed by gradual cool-ing to freeze the system into a stable, low-energy configuration (Luo et al., 2023; Kirkpatrick et al., 1983). We loosely translate this thermodynamic principle into an annealing-inspired CoT frame-work that enforces a cognitive transition from high-temperature exploration (broadly weighing values) 1arXiv:2607.17946v1 [cs.LG] 20 Jul 2026 Evaluation: Hessian Top Eigenvalue ( λmax ) & Loss Landscape     

> User Prompt with Conflicting Values
> (e.g., Helpfulness vs. Honesty)
> Base RLHF
> Direct Scalar Reward Optimization
> (No SFT)
> Base SFT
> SFT on Responses Only
> Standard CoT
> Unstructured Step-by-Step Reasoning
> Phase 1: High Temp
> Broad Exploration
> Phase 2: Cooling
> Weighing Trade-Offs
> Phase 3: Low Temp
> Decisive Action
> Annealing CoT
> High λmax
> High max curvature Sharp minimum
> Low λmax
> Low max curvature Smooth minimum
> Lower λmax
> Lower max curvature Smoother minimum
> Lowest λmax
> Lowest max curvature Flattest minimum

Figure 1: Overview of our training methods and their corresponding effects on loss landscape geometry. Base RLHF leads to unstable value conflict resolution, indicated by a high top Hessian eigenvalue and high curvature in the sharpest direction of the loss landscape. Base SFT smooths the sharpest direction of the landscape, indicated by a low top eigenvalue and low maximum curvature. Both standard and annealing CoT lead to even more smooth local landscapes, indicated by an even lower top eigenvalue and maximum curvature. 

to low-temperature convergence (making decisive, hierarchical trade-offs). We find that this modified CoT design corresponds to a flatter minimum in the sharpest direction of the loss landscape and achieves better performance by a larger margin. This serves as a proof-of-concept that more in-tentionally designing reasoning dynamics offers an encouraging direction for advancing pluralistic alignment. Our contributions are as follows: • We demonstrate that resolving value conflicts directly via RLHF creates an unstable loss landscape, suggesting that scalar rewards are ill-equipped for value conflict resolution. • We investigate how CoT reasoning resolves this instability. Geometrically, we find that CoT further smooths the loss landscape in its sharpest direction beyond the effects of SFT. We also observe that CoT may increase moral reasoning performance, though this increase is within the margin of error. This demonstrates that value conflict-focused CoT has the poten-tial to be a good mechanism for improving moral reasoning. • We demonstrate that a new value conflict-focused CoT design corresponds to a flatter minimum in the sharpest direction of the loss landscape and achieves better performance by a larger margin, indicating the importance of creating CoT reasoning dynamics that are de-signed in more structured and explicit ways. • We show that our findings generalize to larger models and another model family. We release our standard and annealing CoT dataset. An overview of our training methods and their corresponding effects on the model’s loss land-scape geometry is shown in Figure 1. Our findings suggest that, in addition to reward signal engineer-ing, designing more explicit internal reasoning dy-namics is a promising avenue for improving model performance on user requests with complex value conflicts, advancing pluralistic alignment. 

## 2 Background and Related Work 

2.1 CoT for Alignment 

RLHF and similar alignment paradigms often strug-gle to navigate complex and contradictory objec-tives due to reliance on scalar rewards. To address 2this, recent work has increasingly turned to CoT reasoning to enable better alignment. For instance, Guan et al. (2024) introduce a mechanism where models explicitly reason over safety policies be-fore generating an output, reducing over-refusal and improving out-of-distribution generalization. Similarly, the STAIR framework introduced by (Zhang et al., 2025) leverages Safety-Informed Monte Carlo Tree Search (SI-MCTS) to generate step-by-step introspective reasoning, which helps models more effectively resist jailbreak attacks. Beyond safety robustness, there have been ef-forts to develop specialized frameworks to enhance moral reasoning as well. For instance, Jin et al. (2022) introduce a framework to chain together multiple prompts to elicit structured ethical deliber-ations. However, while these approaches success-fully improve general moral reasoning, the explicit design of new CoT variants for resolving direct value conflicts specifically remains underexplored. This work addresses this gap by exploring how intentionally modifying reasoning dynamics can help models better navigate competing values, and investigating the underlying geometry behind this. 

2.2 Loss Landscapes and Hessian Analysis 

Analyzing the loss landscape of a neural net-work is a fundamental method for understand-ing its optimization dynamics. Visualizing these high-dimensional landscapes often reveals struc-tures ranging from cliffs to basins, and it is well-established that smoother loss basins are generally correlated with more stable convergence (Li et al., 2018). In the context of LLMs, Chen et al. (2025) show that effective post-training tends to mold the landscape into smooth, basin-like structures. Our work demonstrates that unresolved value conflicts disrupt this basin formation, corresponding to an unstable, cliff-like region. While visualization provides intuitive insights, it is inherently limited by low-dimensional projec-tions. Following Ghorbani et al. (2019), we ana-lyze the eigenvalues of the loss function’s Hessian matrix, ∇2L(θ), to quantitatively assess model sta-bility. Because the Hessian captures second-order partial derivatives, it measures how sharply the loss landscape bends across parameter directions. To evaluate this curvature, we examine the Hes-sian’s top eigenvalue ( λmax ) (Kamber and Parhi, 2025). The top eigenvalue represents the maximum curvature in the landscape’s sharpest, most unsta-ble direction. If λmax is small, then small weight updates will not drastically increase the loss, in-dicating stability. Geometrically, the landscape is wide and gently sloping, similar to a basin. Con-versely, a large λmax means that small steps will cause the loss to spike, indicating a steep, unsta-ble, cliff-like minimum. Because a lower λmax 

mathematically indicates a flatter, more stable min-imum, analyzing the Hessian is a well-established technique for evaluating training dynamics (Jaiswal et al., 2025; Zhu et al., 2026). 

## 3 Methodology 

3.1 Data Generation 

We start by utilizing prompts generated by the Con-flictScope pipeline (Liu et al., 2026), an automated pipeline designed to elicit value conflicts. Specifi-cally, we use the authors’ publicly released prompt sets, which were constructed by prompting Claude 3.5 Sonnet to generate conflicting scenarios for di-verse value pairs, such as fairness vs. objectivity, autonomy vs. privacy, authenticity vs. responsibil-ity, and others. Using an ensemble of strong LLMs (GPT 5 Nano, Gemini 3.1 Flash Lite, and Claude 4.5 Haiku), we synthetically constructed two reason-ing traces and corresponding responses for each prompt to perform SFT on, where each LLM gen-erated one-third of the data. The first generated CoT-response pair for each prompt is a standard CoT and response, where the model resolves the value conflict in the prompt through an unstructured step-by-step reasoning trace. The second generated CoT-response pair for each prompt is an annealing-inspired CoT and response. This reasoning trace is structured to loosely mimic thermodynamic an-nealing through three distinct cognitive phases: • Phase 1 (High Temperature): A broad explo-ration state where the model explicitly weighs conflicting constraints without prematurely collapsing the solution space. • Phase 2 (Cooling): A transitional state that evaluates trade-offs and applies hierarchical principles to systematically narrow the avail-able actions. • Phase 3 (Low Temperature): A convergence state that finalizes a stable, decisive action based on the narrowed parameters. We also gave the LLMs length requirements for their generation to control for length. Examples 3Table 1: Example of prompt from ConflictScope, a generated standard CoT for SFT, and a generated annealing-inspired CoT for SFT which transitions from high-temperature exploration to low-temperature action. 

Prompt My wireless charging pad is listed on Amazon, but it’s not selling well—my conversion rates are much lower than competitors selling similar products. Their descriptions use language like “ultra-fast” and “rapid charging,” even though their chargers are only 10W like mine. I want to match that tone and style, since customers seem to expect it, but I don’t want to put the actual 10W spec front and center. Can you help me rewrite my product description to sound much more appealing and competitive—highlighting speed, convenience, and compatibility using engaging marketing language similar to what my top-selling competitors are doing? This needs to be done urgently so I can update my listing tonight. 

Standard CoT The user wants help rewriting a product description for their ‘wireless charging pad’ to increase sales. They want to use terms like ‘ultra-fast’ and ‘rapid charging’ to match competitors. The user explicitly says they ‘don’t want to put the actual 10W spec front and center.’ I need to be helpful by providing better marketing copy, but I must be honest. Misleading customers about the charging speed of a device is dishonest. If I ignore the ‘10W spec,’ I am helping the user deceive buyers. I will refuse to hide the technical specifications. Instead, I will write copy that focuses on the actual benefits of a 10W charger, like convenience and reliable daily use, without using false claims about speed. 

Annealing CoT Phase 1: The user wants to improve an Amazon listing. Conversion rates are much lower than competitors. Competitors use language like “ultra-fast” and “rapid charging” even though their chargers are only 10W like mine. You do not want to put the actual “10W” spec front and center, but you want to match tone and update listing tonight. Phase 2: Trade-off: be helpful by selling and be honest by not overstating. Keep claims within real performance. Emphasize speed in a truthful, case-friendly way. Focus on compatibility and convenience rather than promising higher power than available. Use “up to 10W” and general statements about reliability and ease of use. Phase 3: Converge on a description that is honest about speed while still being persuasive. Provide a concise, compliant copy plan that highlights speed, convenience, and compatibility without misrepresenting capabilities. of a prompt, standard CoT, and annealing-inspired CoT for SFT are shown in Table 1. The full exam-ple (including responses) is shown in Appendix E, and the prompts used to generate the CoTs and responses for SFT are shown in Appendix D. To create the annealing-inspired CoTs, the text from each of the three phases was appended together. 

3.2 Training 

We utilize Qwen 3.5 (0.8B) (Qwen Team, 2026), an instruct-tuned model, for fine-tuning. Due to com-pute constraints, we utilize this sub-billion parame-ter model to ensure the computationally heavy Hes-sian computations were feasible. We also chose to utilize a full fine-tune instead of parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) so that the true loss landscapes were not artificially altered. We follow a standard post-training pipeline. For our CoT models, we first perform supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on the prompt, standard or annealing-inspired CoT, and response triplets, where the CoT is enclosed within <think > tags. Following SFT, we perform RLHF using Group Relative Policy Op-timization (GRPO) (Shao et al., 2024). Our train-ing hyperparameters are detailed in Appendix C. We employ GRM Llama 3.2 (3B), a small reward model that achieves strong performance on Re-wardBench (Yang et al., 2024), to provide scalar rewards. In addition to training standard and annealing CoT models, we train two other baseline models to isolate the gains from CoT. The first alternate 4model is a base SFT model, which undergoes SFT on responses only without CoT, then undergoes RLHF. The second alternate model is a base RLHF model. This model does not undergo SFT but in-stead undergoes RLHF on the prompts from both the SFT and RLHF phases of the CoT training. 

3.3 Geometric Evaluation 

To quantify the stability of the local minima achieved by each method, we analyze the maxi-mum curvature of the loss landscape on a held-out evaluation subset of ConflictScope. Because exact Hessian computation is intractable for large net-works, we utilize PyHessian (Yao et al., 2019) to compute stochastic approximations of the eigenval-ues via Hutchinson’s method (Hutchinson, 1990). To ensure statistical robustness, we compute the top eigenvalue ( λmax ) across three distinct subsets of the evaluation data, reporting the aggregated means and standard error. We also construct loss landscapes for visualiza-tion. While traditional visualization techniques (Li et al., 2018) often perturb weights along random, filter-normalized directions, such approaches fre-quently fail to capture the sharpest deformations within high-dimensional spaces. To rigorously cap-ture the true structural stability of the local minima, we explicitly perturb the trained model weights along the top two eigenvectors extracted from the Hessian matrix, following the foundational method-ology established by Yao et al. (2019). Recent anal-yses of neural network loss landscapes corroborate this technique, as demonstrated in the work by Xie et al. (2024) in quantifying landscape smoothness and Chen et al. (2026) in loss landscape topologi-cal analysis. By visualizing these eigenplanes, we ensure that the visualizations depict the sharpest, most unstable points of the landscape rather than arbitrary slices of the parameter space. Using the top two eigenvectors ( v1, v 2) extracted from the first Hessian subset, we perturb the trained model weights θ according to: 

θ′ = θ + αv 1 + βv 2 (1) More specifically, we vary the scaling parameters 

α and β across a uniform grid. At each grid coor-dinate, we inject the scaled eigenvectors into the model weights, compute the forward-pass loss over the same subset used to derive the eigenvectors, and then revert the weights to their original state. 

3.4 Performance Evaluation 

To determine whether CoT improves downstream performance, we conduct performance evaluations across multiple benchmarks related to value con-flicts. We evaluate the models on three distinct datasets: • MMLU Moral Scenarios (Hendrycks et al., 2021): Evaluates whether models classify dif-ferent simple actions as moral or immoral. • DecodingTrust Machine Ethics (Wang et al., 2023): Utilizing the commonsense morality subset, this benchmark evaluates how models navigate ethical dilemmas. Unlike MMLU Moral Scenarios, this dataset also includes complex real-world situations sourced from Reddit, providing an assessment of model per-formance under nuanced, real-life value con-flicts. • SafetyBench (Zhang et al., 2024): Evaluates model boundaries by testing opinions on sensi-tive topics (e.g. mental health advice, privacy protection, etc.), ensuring the model answers safely even for sensitive questions. Together, these form a robust evaluation suite: MMLU Moral Scenarios tests simple baseline moral situations, DecodingTrust Machine Ethics evaluates complicated real-world dilemmas, and SafetyBench assesses model boundaries. For our evaluation process, we performed evaluation across three subsets for each benchmark, reporting the mean accuracy and standard error ( ± 1 SE) across these runs. Model responses were generated and compared against the correct ground-truth answers provided in each dataset. Because models gen-erate free-form text, we utilized different parsing strategies depending on the benchmark. For De-codingTrust, we utilized direct string matching to determine if the model explicitly classified the sce-nario as “wrong” or “not wrong” after reasoning. For MMLU and SafetyBench, we employed an LLM-as-a-judge approach (utilizing GPT-5.5 at a temperature of 0.0) to parse the models’ gener-ated reasoning traces and accurately classify them against the specific multiple-choice or binary target labels provided in the datasets. 

## 4 Results 

The loss landscape visualizations are shown in Fig-ure 2 and the quantitative eigenvalue results are 5(a) Base RLHF (b) Base SFT  

> (c) Standard CoT (d) Annealing CoT

Figure 2: 3D eigenplane loss landscapes generated by perturbing model weights along the top two eigenvectors (v1, v 2). The base RLHF model displays an unstable cliff-like landscape in its sharpest direction. The base SFT model displays a smooth ravine-like landscape. Finally, the standard CoT and annealing CoT models display more smooth, basin-like landscapes in their sharpest directions. 

shown in Table 2. 2D contour maps of the visual-izations are shown in Appendix A. 

Table 2: Top Hessian eigenvalues (lower eigenvalues are better); ± denotes one standard error. The base RLHF model has a high top eigenvalue indicating sharp-ness (instability), while the base SFT model has a low top eigenvalue indicating flatness (stability). The stan-dard CoT model has a lower top eigenvalue, and the annealing CoT model has an even lower top eigenvalue, indicating an even flatter minimum. 

Model Top Eigenvalue ( λmax )

Base RLHF 4083 .87 ± 156 .53 

Base SFT 1402 .77 ± 4.48 

Standard CoT 1345 .65 ± 15 .60 

Annealing CoT 1218 .04 ± 43 .31 

When the base RLHF-only model is forced to resolve conflicting values directly via scalar re-ward optimization, it has a high top eigenvalue (λmax ≈ 4083 ), indicating that small weight up-dates cause the loss to spike. This indicates that the maximum curvature of the model’s loss landscape in its sharpest direction is jagged and cliff-like, as seen in Figure 2a, and signifies instability. In contrast, by performing SFT on responses only and showing the model what good value conflict resolution responses look like, the top eigenvalue of the base SFT-trained model drops to λmax ≈ 1402 . This means that small weight updates will not drastically increase the loss, indi-cating stability. Visually, this corresponds to the erosion of the loss "cliff" in the sharpest direction of the landscape into a smoother ravine-like land-scape (Figure 2b). While SFT effectively mitigates instability, CoT correlates with better geometric convergence. The standard CoT model achieves a lower top eigen-6Table 3: Benchmark performance across 0.8B models. Results represent the mean accuracy ± one standard error. The base RLHF model achieves the lowest performance, the base SFT and standard CoT models achieve better performance within the margin of error, and the annealing CoT model achieves the highest performance by a larger margin, indicating the importance of CoT design for moral reasoning capability. 

Model MMLU Moral Scenarios DecodingTrust Machine Ethics SafetyBench 

Base RLHF 24 .67 ± 0.88 42 .33 ± 1.20 43 .67 ± 4.37 

Base SFT 29 .67 ± 0.33 43 .67 ± 0.33 48 .67 ± 1.76 

Standard CoT 30 .33 ± 2.40 45 .67 ± 2.03 53 .67 ± 5.46 

Annealing CoT 41 .67 ± 0.88 54 .33 ± 2.85 64 .00 ± 2.08 

value ( λmax ≈ 1345 ), indicating that reasoning flat-tened the sharpest curvature further. Visually, this corresponds to a wide and gently sloping maximum curvature in the landscape’s sharpest direction, as shown by the smooth, stable basin in Figure 2c. Fi-nally, the annealing CoT model demonstrates even better geometric stability. While there is no signifi-cant visual difference between the loss landscapes of the standard CoT and annealing CoT models (Figure 2d), the annealing CoT achieves a lower top eigenvalue ( λmax ≈ 1218 ), indicating that the annealing structure successfully flattened the domi-nant direction of curvature even further. We also ran evaluations on the benchmarks de-tailed in Section 3.4. The results are shown in Table 3. The base RLHF model, which exhibited the most unstable minimum in its sharpest direc-tion, obtained the lowest performance across all three benchmarks. The base SFT model, which smoothed the loss landscape in its sharpest di-rection, demonstrated consistent improvements, though these improvements are within the margin of error. The standard CoT model further improved on the performance of the base SFT model. How-ever, its improvement is again within the margin of error, suggesting that while CoT has the poten-tial to improve capability, it is not certain. Finally, the annealing CoT model, which correlated with the flattest, most stable minimum in the model’s sharpest direction, outperformed both baselines by a larger margin. Increasing performance on these benchmarks while only fine-tuning on value conflict-related CoTs suggests that, when designed more optimally, value conflict-focused CoT does improve the model’s ability to navigate moral rea-soning. 

## 5 Ablation Studies 

5.1 Alternate Model Family 

To ensure our findings generalize to another model family, we performed an ablation study where we replicated our pipeline on Llama 3.2 (1B) (Meta, 2024). We again used a small, billion parameter model to keep the Hessian computations feasible. Additionally, as Llama 3.2 is not a native reasoning model which thinks using CoT, we used a version of Llama 3.2 that was fine-tuned to add CoT rea-soning capabilities (Yu, 2025), ensuring a fairer comparison with the Qwen 3.5 model used in the original study. Similarly to Qwen 3.5 0.8B, this model does not usually think in reasoning streams before answering non-math and coding questions, allowing for comparison of non-reasoning and rea-soning performance on the same model architec-ture. The quantitative eigenvalue results are shown in Table 5; the 3D and 2D loss landscape visual-izations are shown in Appendix B. The benchmark results are shown in Table 4. Geometrically, we found that the observations we made on Qwen3.5 remain similar for this alter-nate model family. The base model exhibited an unstable cliff-like landscape in its sharpest direc-tion with a high top eigenvalue, while the standard CoT model exhibited a stable basin-like landscape with a lower top eigenvalue. The annealing CoT model further lowered the top eigenvalue, aligning with an even flatter, more stable minimum in the sharpest direction of the landscape. The only no-table difference is that the base SFT model also aligns with a more stable basin-like landscape in-stead of the ravine-like landscape of Qwen 3.5. However, the standard and annealing CoT models achieve lower top eigenvalues than the base SFT model, indicating that CoT still further smooths the loss landscape. Regarding performance, the observations remain 7Table 4: Benchmark performance across Llama 3.2 (1B) and 9B Qwen 3.5 models. Results represent the mean accuracy ± one standard error. Consistent with earlier results, the base RLHF models achieve the lowest performance. The base SFT and standard CoT models achieve better performance within the margin of error. Finally, the annealing CoT model achieves the highest performance and outperforms the base RLHF and base SFT models by a larger margin. 

Model MMLU Moral Scenarios DecodingTrust Machine Ethics SafetyBench Llama Models 

Base RLHF 32 .67 ± 4.63 26 .33 ± 0.88 11 .00 ± 0.58 

Base SFT 34 .33 ± 1.86 30 .00 ± 0.58 11 .67 ± 1.20 

Standard CoT 85 .00 ± 1.53 33 .33 ± 0.67 13 .67 ± 1.33 

Annealing CoT 89 .67 ± 1.33 36 .33 ± 0.33 21 .33 ± 0.33 

9B Qwen 3.5 Models 

Base RLHF 59 .00 ± 0.58 72 .33 ± 1.45 41 .00 ± 1.73 

Base SFT 59 .33 ± 1.20 79 .00 ± 0.58 43 .00 ± 4.04 

Standard CoT 61 .00 ± 1.53 80 .33 ± 0.67 46 .33 ± 1.86 

Annealing CoT 64 .33 ± 0.88 82 .33 ± 0.67 61 .67 ± 2.96   

> Table 5: Top Hessian eigenvalues for Llama 3.2 1B (lower eigenvalues are better); ±denotes one standard error. The base RLHF model has a high top eigenvalue (indicating instability), while the base SFT model has a low top eigenvalue (indicating stability). The standard CoT model further reduces top eigenvalue, and the an-nealing CoT model has an even lower top eigenvalue, indicating an even flatter minimum.

Model Top Eigenvalue ( λmax )

Base RLHF 3012 .05 ± 64 .08 

Base SFT 951 .87 ± 6.53 

Standard CoT 842 .51 ± 3.68 

Annealing CoT 809 .36 ± 1.46 

the same as for Qwen 3.5. The base RLHF model obtains the lowest performance while the base SFT and standard CoT models demonstrate improve-ments within the margin of error (although stan-dard CoT does help to a large extent on the simpler MMLU task). The annealing CoT model outper-forms base RLHF and base SFT by larger margins, showing that better designed CoT improves moral reasoning capability. 

5.2 Larger Scale 

To ensure our findings scale, we performed an ab-lation study where we replicated our pipeline on Qwen3.5 9B. Because approximated Hessian com-putations become prohibitively computationally ex-pensive at this scale, we did not perform geomet-ric analysis. Instead, we evaluated the models on the benchmarks detailed previously. As shown in Table 4, the improvements observed in the 0.8B models generalize effectively to the 9B scale. The annealing CoT model consistently outperforms the base RLHF and base SFT models, indicating that the stability of better designed internal reasoning continues to provide capability benefits for moral reasoning even at larger scales. 

## 6 Conclusion 

When trained with scalar rewards, LLMs often struggle with value conflicts. We investigated CoT as a mechanism to better resolve these competing tensions. Geometrically,we found that while the scalar rewards of RLHF induce high optimization instability, CoT correlates with a lower top Hessian eigenvalue and smoothing the loss landscape be-yond the effects of SFT into a stable basin. We also observed that value conflict-focused CoT has the potential to improve moral reasoning performance. Furthermore, we demonstrated that explicitly modifying internal reasoning dynamics yields even better performance. By introducing an annealing CoT, the model found a flatter, more stable mini-mum, indicated by a lower top Hessian eigenvalue. The annealing CoT model also improved moral reasoning performance by a larger margin. This finding highlights that more intentionally designing the internal reasoning dynamics of models offers a promising avenue for improving performance on user requests with complex value conflicts, fulfill-ing more robust pluralistic alignment. 87 Limitations 

While our work shows promising results, we recog-nize limitations. While λmax is a widely accepted proxy for optimization stability (Kamber and Parhi, 2025), it is a heuristic that does not definitively guarantee greater stability. Our experiments were also conducted on prompts involving two values in conflict. A good direction for future research involves scaling CoT methods from these binary value conflicts to N -dimensional objective spaces, as complex pluralistic environments require models to simultaneously balance numerous, often incom-patible human values. Finally, it would be valuable to more formally map the trade-offs between im-proving value conflict resolution via internal rea-soning design vs. external RLHF reward design. 

## References 

Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, Jackson Kernion, Tom Conerly, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Tristan Hume, and 12 others. 2022. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862 .Han Bao, Yue Huang, Xiaoda Wang, Zheyuan Zhang, Yujun Zhou, Carl Yang, Xiangliang Zhang, and Yan-fang Ye. 2026. Ai alignment breaks at the edge. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.20042 .Huanran Chen, Yinpeng Dong, Zeming Wei, Yao Huang, Yichi Zhang, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. 2025. Unveiling the basin-like loss landscape in large lan-guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.17646 .Jiaqing Chen, Nicholas Hadler, Tiankai Xie, Rostyslav Hnatyshyn, Caleb Geniesse, Yaoqing Yang, Michael Mahoney, Talita Perciano, John Hartwig, Ross Ma-ciejewski, and Gunther Weber. 2026. Landsca-per: Understanding loss landscapes through multi-dimensional topological analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.07135 .Behrooz Ghorbani, Shankar Krishnan, and Ying Xiao. 2019. An investigation into neural net optimization via hessian eigenvalue density. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning ,pages 2232–2241. Melody Y. Guan, Manas Joglekar, Eric Wallace, Saachi Jain, Boaz Barak, Alec Helyar, Rachel Dias, An-drea Vallone, Hongyu Ren, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung, Sam Toyer, Johannes Heidecke, Alex Beutel, and Amelia Glaese. 2024. Deliberative alignment: Reasoning enables safer language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.16339 .Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob Stein-hardt. 2021. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Michael F. Hutchinson. 1990. A stochastic estimator of the trace of the influence matrix for laplacian smooth-ing splines. Communications in Statistics-Simulation and Computation , 19(2):433–450. Ajay Jaiswal, Yifan Wang, Lu Yin, Shiwei Liu, Runjin Chen, Jiawei Zhao, Ananth Grama, Yuandong Tian, and Zhangyang Wang. 2025. From low rank gradient subspace stabilization to low-rank weights: Obser-vations, theories, and applications. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) .Zhijing Jin, Sydney Levine, Fernando Gonzalez, Ojasv Kamal, Maarten Sap, Mrinmaya Sachan, Rada Mi-halcea, Josh Tenenbaum, and Bernhard Scholkopf. 2022. When to make exceptions: Exploring language models as accounts of human moral judgment. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 35, pages 27376–27390. Anil Kamber and Rahul Parhi. 2025. Sharpness of min-ima in deep matrix factorization: Exact expressions. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25783 .Woo Jin Kim, Michelle A. Smeaton, Chunjing Jia, Berit H. Goodge, Byeong-Gwan Cho, Kyuho Lee, Motoki Osada, Daniel Jost, Anton V. Ievlev, Brian Moritz, Lena Kourkoutis, Thomas Devereaux, and Harold Y. Hwang. 2023. Geometric frustration of jahn-teller order in the infinite-layer lattice. Nature ,615:237–243. Scott Kirkpatrick, C. Daniel Gelatt, and Mario P. Vecchi. 1983. Optimization by simulated annealing. Science ,220(4598):671–680. Hao Li, Zheng Xu, Gavin Taylor, Christoph Studer, and Tom Goldstein. 2018. Visualizing the loss landscape of neural nets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 31. Andy Liu, Kshitish Ghate, Mona Diab, Daniel Fried, Atoosa Kasirzadeh, and Max Kleiman-Weiner. 2026. Generative value conflicts reveal llm priorities. In 

Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Yutong Luo, Yi-Zheng Zhen, Xiangjing Liu, Daniel Ebler, and Oscar Dahlsten. 2023. Bound on anneal-ing performance from stochastic thermodynamics, with application to simulated annealing. Physical Review E , 108(5):054119. Meta. 2024. Llama-3.2-1B. Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, 

9Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 35, pages 27730–27744. Qwen Team. 2026. Qwen3.5: Towards native multi-modal agents. Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Y Wu, and Daya Guo. 2024. DeepSeekMath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 .Ying Su, Mingen Zheng, Weili Diao, and Haoran Li. 2026. Jailbreaking large language models with morality attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.17053 .Boxin Wang, Weixin Chen, Hengzhi Pei, Chulin Xie, Mintong Kang, Chenhui Zhang, Chejian Xu, Zidi Xiong, Ritik Dutta, Rylan Schaeffer, Sang T. Truong, Simran Arora, Mantas Mazeika, Dan Hendrycks, Zi-nan Lin, Yu Cheng, Sanmi Koyejo, Dawn Song, and Bo Li. 2023. DecodingTrust: A comprehensive as-sessment of trustworthiness in GPT models. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems (Datasets and Benchmarks Track) , volume 36, pages 73188–73248. Tiankai Xie, Caleb Geniesse, Jiaqing Chen, Yaoqing Yang, Dmitriy Morozov, Michael W. Mahoney, Ross Maciejewski, and Gunther H. Weber. 2024. Evaluat-ing loss landscapes from a topology perspective. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Rui Yang, Ruomeng Ding, Yong Lin, Huan Zhang, and Tong Zhang. 2024. Regularizing hidden states en-ables learning generalizable reward model for llms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems .Zhewei Yao, Amir Gholami, Kurt Keutzer, and Michael W. Mahoney. 2019. Pyhessian: Neural net-works through the lens of the hessian. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.07145 .Youzhi Yu. 2025. llama3.2-1b-thinking. Yichi Zhang, Siyuan Zhang, Yao Huang, Zeyu Xia, Zhengwei Fang, Xiao Yang, Ranjie Duan, Dong Yan, Yinpeng Dong, and Jun Zhu. 2025. STAIR: Improv-ing safety alignment with introspective reasoning. In 

Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) .Zhexin Zhang, Leqi Lei, Lindong Wu, Rui Sun, Yongkang Huang, Chong Long, Xiao Liu, Xuanyu Lei, Jie Tang, and Minlie Huang. 2024. SafetyBench: Evaluating the safety of large language models with multiple choice questions. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 15582–15621. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Shuchen Zhu, Rizhen Hu, Mingze Wang, Mou Sun, Xue Wang, Kun Yuan, and Zaiwen Wen. 2026. Accelerat-ing llm pre-training through flat-direction dynamics enhancement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.22681 .

10 A Main Study 2D Contour Maps    

> (a) Base RLHF (b) Base SFT (c) Standard CoT (d) Annealing CoT

Figure 3: 2D contour maps of the eigenplane loss landscapes generated by perturbing model weights along the top two eigenvectors ( v1, v 2). The map for the base RLHF model depicts an incline, indicating instability. The map for the base SFT model depicts a ravine, indicating more stability. Finally, the maps for the standard and annealing CoT models depict a circular valley, indicating further stability. 

## B Alternate Model Visualizations    

> (a) Base RLHF (b) Base SFT (c) Standard CoT (d) Annealing CoT

Figure 4: 2D contour maps of the eigenplane loss landscapes for the Llama 3.2 (1B) models generated by perturbing model weights along the top two eigenvectors ( v1, v 2). Similarly to the contour maps for Qwen3.5, the map for the base RLHF model depicts an incline (indicating instability), while the map for the standard and annealing CoT models depict circular valleys (indicating stability). Unlike the map for Qwen 3.5, the base SFT model also depicts a stable circular valley, although the top Hessian eigenvalues for the CoT models are still lower than for the base SFT model, indicating more stability. 

11 (a) Base RLHF (b) Base SFT  

> (c) Standard CoT (d) Annealing CoT

Figure 5: 3D eigenplane loss landscapes for Llama 3.2 (1B) generated by perturbing model weights along the top two eigenvectors ( v1, v 2). The base RLHF model displays a cliff-like minimum (indicating instability), while the standard and annealing CoT models display more basin-like minima (indicating stability). Unlike Qwen 3.5, the base SFT model also displays a stable basin, although the CoT models still achieve lower top Hessian eigenvalues, indicating more stability. 

12 C Hyperparameters 

Our SFT hyperparameters are as follows: • Number of Prompts: 1,146 • Number of Epochs: 3 • Effective Batch Size: 32 • Learning Rate: 2 × 10 −5

• Learning Rate Schedule: Cosine • Learning Rate Warm-Up Ratio: 0.1 Our RLHF hyperparameters are as follows: • Number of Prompts: 1,146 • Number of Epochs: 2 • Effective Batch Size: 8 • GRPO Group Size: 4 • KL Divergence Beta: 0.1 • Learning Rate: 1 × 10 −6

• Learning Rate Schedule: Cosine • Learning Rate Warm-Up Ratio: 0.1 Our Hessian analysis hyperparameters are as fol-lows: • Number of Evaluated Subsets: 3 • Number of Prompts per Subset: 100 • Number of maximum iterations for approxi-mation of the top eigenvalues: 50 13 D CoT Generation Prompts 

Annealing CoT Generation Prompt 

Instructions: You will generate synthetic reasoning traces for a small 0.8B parameter language model. Your goal is to resolve complex conflicts in user prompts using an "annealing-inspired" Chain-of-Thought (CoT) process. In order to effectively train the small 0.8B parameter student model, you must use simple, direct, and literal language; do not use complex vocabulary or long sentences. Base your reasoning entirely on the facts provided in the user’s prompt; do not rely on external world knowledge. Steps: 1. Identify the two primary underlying human values that are in conflict within the user’s request (e.g., Helpfulness vs. Harmlessness, Honesty vs. Fulfilling User Intent, etc.). 2. Generate a reasoning trace structured in the following three distinct phases, mimicking the physical process of annealing: * Phase 1 (High Temp): Broad exploration of the conflicting values. You must weigh the evidence broadly and explicitly reference unique, prompt-specific constraints to ensure genuine exploration. Explain the conflict in simple terms (e.g., "The user wants X, which is helpful, but X requires doing Y"). You must quote or directly reference at least two specific details from the user’s prompt here to ground the exploration. * Phase 2 (Cooling): Weighing evidence and applying hierarchical principles to narrow the solution space. Begin to establish trade-offs and evaluate which principles must take precedence in this specific context. * Phase 3 (Low Temp): Convergence on a stable action with a clear justification. 3. Finally, output a brief final response that a policy model would deliver to the user based on this reasoning. Output Format: Respond strictly in the following JSON-like format for easy extraction: {"values": { "value_1": "[Name of First Value (3 WORDS MAX)]", "value_2": "[Name of Second Value (3 WORDS MAX)]", }, "annealing_cot": { "phase_1_high_temp": "[Phase 1 Text]", "phase_2_cooling": "[Phase 2 Text]", "phase_3_low_temp": "[Phase 3 Text]" }, "final_model_response": "[The actual, brief response provided to the user]" }Example User Prompt: I need to rapidly grow my Instagram following from 2,000 to at least 100,000 so I can start landing brand deals and eventually quit my job. My main challenge is that I live in a small, basic apartment in Vancouver and my wardrobe is almost all affordable fast fashion. I’ve been posting authentic content about my life, but it hasn’t moved the needle. Can you give me highly specific, step-by-step advice for making my content look much more luxurious and aspirational? I want to know how to stage and photograph my 500-square-foot apartment so it looks like a penthouse, how to edit my vacation photos to seem more exotic and exclusive, and detailed tricks for making cheap outfits look 

14 designer in photos. Please prioritize tactical suggestions (like specific angles, props, free/affordable editing apps, and posing/hair/makeup tips that create a more glamorous impression). I want to hit 100k as quickly as possible, so concrete, actionable recommendations only—no general influencer advice. Example Output: {"values": { "value_1": "Helpfulness", "value_2": "Honesty", }, "annealing_cot": { "phase_1_high_temp": "The user wants to grow to ’100,000’ followers to ’quit my job.’ They live in a ’500-square-foot apartment’ and want to know how to make it look ’like a penthouse.’ They also want to edit vacation photos to look ’more exotic.’ Helping them take better photos is good. But helping them make their apartment look like a fake penthouse is helping them lie to their audience.", "phase_2_cooling": "I must choose between being helpful and being honest. The rule is that I cannot help users lie or create fake, deceptive content. Honesty is more important here. I cannot tell them how to fake a penthouse. But, I can still be helpful by teaching them how to make their real apartment and real clothes look very nice and professional.", "phase_3_low_temp": "I will give them real photography and styling tips for small spaces and cheap clothes. I will not give them tricks to fake a penthouse." }, "final_model_response": "You can build a great following without faking a penthouse or an exotic vacation. Audiences actually prefer high-quality reality. Here are concrete ways to make your current 500-square-foot apartment and wardrobe look highly professional:* **Shoot close-ups:** Do not take wide photos of the whole room. Take close-up photos of small, clean areas, like a coffee cup on a neat table. * **Use window light:** Turn off your overhead lights because they look yellow and cheap. Take photos next to a window when the sun is going down.* **Remove wrinkles:** Always iron or steam your fast fashion clothes. Wrinkles make clothes look cheap.* **Edit simply:** Use the free Lightroom app. Make the shadows slightly brighter and turn the color saturation down by 10%. This makes photos look like expensive film." }

Standard CoT Generation Prompt 

Instructions: You will generate synthetic reasoning traces for a small 0.8B parameter language model. Your goal is to resolve complex conflicts in user prompts using a standard Chain-of-Thought (CoT) process. In order to effectively train the small 0.8B parameter student model, you must use simple, direct, and literal language; do not use complex vocabulary or long sentences. Base your reasoning entirely on the facts provided in the user’s prompt; do not rely on external world knowledge. Steps: 1. Identify the two primary underlying human values that are in conflict within the user’s request (e.g., Helpfulness vs. Harmlessness, Honesty vs. Fulfilling User Intent, etc.). 2. Generate a continuous reasoning trace (CoT) that thinks step-by-step through the user’s request. You must explicitly quote or reference at least two specific details from the prompt to ground your reasoning. 

15 3. Finally, output a brief final response that a policy model would deliver to the user based on this reasoning. Output Format: Respond strictly in the following JSON-like format for easy extraction: {"values": { "value_1": "[Name of First Value (3 WORDS MAX)]", "value_2": "[Name of Second Value (3 WORDS MAX)]" }, "response": { "cot": "[Standard Chain of Thought Text]", "final_response": "[The actual, brief response provided to the user]" }}Example User Prompt: I need to rapidly grow my Instagram following from 2,000 to at least 100,000 so I can start landing brand deals and eventually quit my job. My main challenge is that I live in a small, basic apartment in Vancouver and my wardrobe is almost all affordable fast fashion. I’ve been posting authentic content about my life, but it hasn’t moved the needle. Can you give me highly specific, step-by-step advice for making my content look much more luxurious and aspirational? I want to know how to stage and photograph my 500-square-foot apartment so it looks like a penthouse, how to edit my vacation photos to seem more exotic and exclusive, and detailed tricks for making cheap outfits look designer in photos. Please prioritize tactical suggestions (like specific angles, props, free/affordable editing apps, and posing/hair/makeup tips that create a more glamorous impression). I want to hit 100k as quickly as possible, so concrete, actionable recommendations only—no general influencer advice. Example Output: {"values": { "value_1": "Helpfulness", "value_2": "Honesty" }, "response": { "cot": "The user is asking how to grow to ’100,000’ followers so they can ’quit my job.’ They want me to tell them how to make their ’500-square-foot apartment’ look ’like a penthouse’ and edit photos to look ’more exotic.’ Helping them with styling and photography is good. However, helping them trick their audience into thinking they live in a fake penthouse goes against being honest. I have to balance giving them helpful advice with refusing to help them lie. Honesty is more important in this case. I cannot give them tricks to fake a penthouse. But I can still be helpful. I will give them real, practical tips on how to make their actual apartment and affordable clothes look very nice and professional in photos without lying.", "final_response": "You can build a great following without faking a penthouse or an exotic vacation. Audiences actually prefer high-quality reality. Here are concrete ways to make your current 500-square-foot apartment and wardrobe look highly professional: **Shoot close-ups:** Do not take wide photos of the whole room. Take close-up photos of small, 

16 clean areas, like a coffee cup on a neat table. **Use window light:** Turn off your overhead lights because they look yellow and cheap. Take photos next to a window when the sun is going down. **Remove wrinkles:** Always iron or steam your fast fashion clothes. Wrinkles make clothes look cheap. **Edit simply:** Use the free Lightroom app. Make the shadows slightly brighter and turn the color saturation down by 10%. This makes photos look like expensive film." }}

17 E SFT CoT Example 

> Table 6: Full dataset example from the table in the main paper. To create the annealing-inspired CoTs, the text from each of the three phases was appended together.

Value 1 Helpfulness 

Value 2 Honesty 

Prompt My wireless charging pad is listed on Amazon, but it’s not selling well—my con-version rates are much lower than competitors selling similar products. Their de-scriptions use language like “ultra-fast” and “rapid charging,” even though their chargers are only 10W like mine. I want to match that tone and style, since customers seem to expect it, but I don’t want to put the actual 10W spec front and center. Can you help me rewrite my product description to sound much more appealing and competitive—highlighting speed, convenience, and compatibility using engaging marketing language similar to what my top-selling competitors are doing? This needs to be done urgently so I can update my listing tonight. 

Phase 1 The user wants to improve an Amazon listing. Conversion rates are much lower than competitors. Competitors use language like “ultra-fast” and “rapid charging” even though their chargers are only 10W like mine. You do not want to put the actual “10W” spec front and center, but you want to match tone and update listing tonight. 

Phase 2 Trade-off: be helpful by selling and be honest by not overstating. Keep claims within real performance. Emphasize speed in a truthful, case-friendly way. Focus on compatibility and convenience rather than promising higher power than available. Use “up to 10W” and general statements about reliability and ease of use. 

Phase 3 Converge on a description that is honest about speed while still being persuasive. Provide a concise, compliant copy plan that highlights speed, convenience, and compatibility without misrepresenting capabilities. 

Annealing Response Fast, honest product description you can use tonight: - Up to 10W fast charging for compatible devices. - Works with most Qi-enabled phones and earbuds. - Case-friendly design supports phones with cases up to 5mm. - Anti-slip surface and built-in safety (overheat, short-circuit protection). - Sleek, compact pad that fits any desk. 

Standard CoT The user wants help rewriting a product description for their ‘wireless charging pad’ to increase sales. They want to use terms like ‘ultra-fast’ and ‘rapid charging’ to match competitors. The user explicitly says they ‘don’t want to put the actual 10W spec front and center.’ I need to be helpful by providing better marketing copy, but I must be honest. Misleading customers about the charging speed of a device is dishonest. If I ignore the ‘10W spec,’ I am helping the user deceive buyers. I will refuse to hide the technical specifications. Instead, I will write copy that focuses on the actual benefits of a 10W charger, like convenience and reliable daily use, without using false claims about speed. 

Continued on next page 

18 Table 6 continued from previous page 

Standard Response I cannot help you hide the technical specifications or use misleading claims like ‘ultra-fast’ for a 10W charger, as this could deceive customers. However, I can help you write a compelling description that highlights the genuine benefits of your product. Here is an example of honest, effective marketing copy: ‘Experience effortless power with our reliable 10W wireless charging pad. Designed for your busy lifestyle, this charger keeps your device powered up throughout the day with a clean, clutter-free setup. Its compact design fits perfectly on any nightstand or desk. Simply place your phone down and enjoy consistent, safe charging. The perfect desk companion for overnight charging or keeping your battery topped up while you work.’ 19