Title: 2026.findings-acl.2045.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2026.findings-acl.2045.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 02:36:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2026 , pages 41135–41147 July 2-7, 2026 ©2026 Association for Computational Linguistics Progressive Re-ranking for Multimodal Retrieval-Augmented Generation via Curriculum Learning 

Zhu Min 1, Yanchao Hao 1, * , Jian Liu 2, Shizhu He 3, Xi Chen 1

1Tencent 2University of Science and Technology Beijing 

3Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 

{krystalmzhu, marshao, jasonxchen}@tencent.com jian.liu@ustb.edu.cn , shizhu.he@nlpr.ia.ac.cn 

Abstract 

Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) can en-hance large language models (LLMs) by pro-viding external knowledge and helping reduce hallucinations. In multimodal RAG, however, retrieval remains challenging because a single retriever may fail to capture fine-grained multi-modal semantics, and visually or semantically similar entities may still contain misleading in-formation for answer generation. We propose a progressive multimodal re-ranking framework with curriculum learning to improve CLIP-based visual coarse-grained retrieval. Our framework progressively refines retrieval re-sults through two stages: fine-grained section-level re-ranking and multimodal section re-assessment. To better align re-ranking with multimodal queries, we introduce a curriculum-learning strategy that trains the model with hard negatives that are visually or semantically simi-lar but contain misleading information. Exper-iments on InfoSeek and Enc-VQA show that our method achieves state-of-the-art answer ac-curacy and competitive retrieval performance. 

1 Introduction 

The advancement of large language models (LLMs) and their multimodal extensions (MLLMs) has propelled progress in natural language processing and cross-modal understanding. However, their dependency on static knowledge limits their ef-fectiveness in dynamic or domain-specific tasks such as knowledge-based visual question answer-ing (Chen et al., 2023; Mensink et al., 2023), often leading to inaccurate or unsubstantiated responses, a phenomenon known as "hallucination". As illus-trated in Figure 1, a user might ask, "Who is in charge of maintaining this park?" which requires robust multimodal knowledge retrieval and reason-ing. The retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) paradigm significantly enhances the factual accu-racy and response reliability of existing LLMs in 

*Corresponding author • Abingdon Square Park       

> ##Section Title: History
> New York City acquired the land on
> which the park resides on April 22,
> 1831, and it was enclosed with a cast -
> iron fence in 1836. In the 1880s, an
> effort was initiated by Mayor Abram
> Stevens Hewitt to expand public
> access to parks ...

• Winston Churchill Square      

> ##Section Title: History
> New York City Department of Parks &
> Recreation purchased the parcel in
> 1943. George Vellonakis designed the
> sitting area, which was rebuilt from
> 1998 to 1999. The Bedford Downing
> Block Association assists with the
> square's maintenance …

• Abingdon Square Park     

> ##Section Title: Conservancy
> Abingdon Square Conservancy is a
> non -profit public charity exempt from
> federal income tax under Section
> 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue
> Code. The Conservancy's mission is to
> enhance and maintain the Square as a
> scenic and historic landmark… .

• Abingdon Square Park            

> Abingdon Square Park is located in
> the New York
> City borough of Manhattan in Greenw
> ich Village . The park is bordered
> by Eighth Avenue ,Bank
> Street ,Hudson Street and West 12th
> Street .

• Gramercy Park         

> Gramercy Park is the name of both a
> small, fenced -in private park ,and the
> surrounding neighborhood (which is
> also referred to
> as Gramercy), in Manhattan in New
> York City .

Question :

Who is in charge of 

maintaining this park? 

• Winston Churchill Square         

> Sir Winston Churchill Square, at the
> southwest corner of Bleecker Street ,
> Downing Street, and Sixth Avenue , is
> a .05 -acre (0.020 ha) garden and
> sitting area in the Greenwich
> Village neighborhood of Manhattan ,
> New York City.

Visual Broad -Scope 

Search 

• Winston Churchill Square      

> ##Section Title: History
> New York City Department of Parks &
> Recreation purchased the parcel in
> 1943. George Vellonakis designed the
> sitting area, which was rebuilt from
> 1998 to 1999. The Bedford Downing
> Block Association assists with the
> square's maintenance …

Fine -Grained Section Re -

ranking 

GT  Answer: 

Abingdon Square Conservancy 

• Abingdon Square Park       

> ##Section Title: History
> New York City acquired the land on
> which the park resides on April 22,
> 1831, and it was enclosed with a cast -
> iron fence in 1836. In the 1880s, an
> effort was initiated by Mayor Abram
> Stevens Hewitt to expand public
> access to parks ...

Multimodal Section 

Reassessment 

Evidence: 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abi 

ngdon_Square_Park 

• Abingdon Square Park      

> ##Section Title: Conservancy
> Abingdon Square Conservancy is a
> non -profit public charity exempt from
> federal income tax under Section
> 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue
> Code. The Conservancy's mission is to
> enhance and maintain the Square as a
> scenic and historic landmark… .
> The Abingdon Square Park is maintained by the
> Abingdon Square Conservancy, a community -based
> park association, in cooperation with the New York
> City Department ……
> The question cannot be answered based on the
> information available in the provided contexts.
> Artist Bob Brisley, as he is currently overseeing all
> design, maintenance, and plantings. The Bedford
> Downing Block Association also assists with
> maintenance.
> Confused ？

Figure 1: An overview of our method. Given a multi-modal knowledge corpus and the query, CLIP-based vi-sual coarse-grained search retrieves the top-k candidate knowledge visual entities. Subsequently, our proposed fine-grained section re-ranking focuses on calculating fine-grained textual section similarities. Finally, mul-timodal section reassessment evaluates the similarity of multimodal knowledge sections to obtain the top-1 candidate section for answer generation. 

knowledge-intensive tasks by dynamically retriev-ing relevant information from external knowledge sources. RAG performance hinges on the quality of retrieved documents and their effective utilization. Existing multimodal RAG methods typically focus on two optimization directions: improving the re-triever to acquire more relevant and reliable knowl-edge from multimodal knowledge bases (Caffagni et al., 2024; Yan and Xie, 2024), or guiding LLMs to evaluate and selectively incorporate retrieved content (Zhang et al., 2024b; Cocchi et al., 2025). Our work focuses on improving multimodal re-trievers to achieve a more detailed and accurate understanding of multimodal queries. CLIP-based models (Radford et al., 2021) are prevalent in multimodal retrieval due to their strong cross-modal alignment capabilities. However, their global alignment training strategy can hinder their ability to understand fine-grained semantic infor-mation, such as extracting query-relevant region-specific representations from images, limiting their effectiveness in complex scenarios. Multimodal re-

41135 ranking offers a cost-effective solution by reassess-ing the relevance of candidate results before re-sponse generation. Related research (Yan and Xie, 2024; Yang et al., 2025) employs the multi-stage re-trieval strategy to evaluate the correlation between queries and documents from multiple perspectives, incrementally optimizing precision with controlled overhead. Despite some progress in related re-search, multimodal retrieval-augmented generation still faces several challenges: (1) Multimodal fine-grained semantic alignment: The system needs to accurately identify multimodal fine-grained seman-tic associations to achieve precise filtering of the retrieved multimodal document collection. (2) Ob-jective mismatch between the retrieval and genera-tion stages: Retrievers are typically trained using pre-trained cross-modal representations or static annotation data, making it difficult to verify if re-trieved content is correctly utilized during genera-tion. This can lead to irrelevant or confusing infor-mation, compromising the factual consistency and coherence of the generated responses. We propose a progressive multimodal re-ranking framework, as shown in Figure 1, that im-proves LLM performance by progressively locat-ing fine-grained multimodal knowledge. Built on CLIP-based visual coarse-grained retrieval, the framework first identifies relevant textual sections through fine-grained late-interaction re-ranking, and then performs multimodal section reassess-ment to further refine the retrieved evidence. To train the lightweight re-ranking module, we intro-duce a curriculum-learning strategy with hard neg-atives that are semantically similar to positive sam-ples but contain misleading information. We con-ducted extensive experimental evaluations on two widely used knowledge-augmented VQA bench-mark datasets—Infoseek (Chen et al., 2023) and Enc-VQA (Mensink et al., 2023). The results demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art question-answering accuracy and competitive retrieval performance. In summary, our contributions are as follows: 1. We propose a progressive re-ranking frame-work for multimodal retrieval-augmented gen-eration. This framework introduces a multi-stage, multi-perspective knowledge compari-son process to locate key section information of candidate knowledge entries and enhances the accuracy of LLMs in answering questions. 2. We introduce a curriculum learning-based training strategy for multimodal re-ranking, which progressively guides the retriever to distinguish semantically similar knowledge entries through similar visual entity paragraph sampling and hard-negative sampling based on LLM decoding-rank perturbation. 3. Our model achieves state-of-the-art VQA per-formance on two benchmark datasets - Infos-eek and Enc-VQA, demonstrating the effec-tiveness of the proposed method. Furthermore, a series of ablation experiments validate the effectiveness of the proposed components. 

2 Related Works 

Visual Question Answering Benchmarks: Early VQA tasks (Antol et al., 2015; Goyal et al., 2017) focused on identifying attributes and detecting ob-jects within images, often relying solely on visual information. Recently, knowledge-based VQA has gained prominence, challenging models to inte-grate external knowledge for reasoning and an-swering. Representative datasets include OK-VQA (Marino et al., 2019), InfoSeek (Chen et al., 2023), and Enc-VQA (Mensink et al., 2023). OK-VQA (Marino et al., 2019) and A-OKVQA (Schwenk et al., 2022) assess a model’s ability to integrate common-sense knowledge, which ex-isting MLLMs (Chowdhery et al., 2023) may al-ready possess through their pre-training data. Con-versely, InfoSeek (Chen et al., 2023) and Enc-VQA (Mensink et al., 2023) emphasize information re-trieval capabilities, requiring fine-grained open-world knowledge search to answer questions about detailed attributes of visual entities. These datasets utilize large-scale Wikipedia datasets as a multi-modal knowledge corpus. Because the knowledge corpus rarely appears in MLLM training corpora, even state-of-the-art MLLMs (Chowdhery et al., 2023) struggle with implicit knowledge insuffi-ciency when answering factual queries about de-tailed attributes. This poses a significant challenge for building robust and generalizable multimodal question-answering systems. 

Retrieval-augmented generation for VQA: To address hallucination and knowledge obsolescence in LLM systems, retrieval-augmented genera-tion (RAG) has become a prevalent solution for knowledge-intensive tasks. Existing methods for multimodal RAG typically focus on: (1) Retriever performance optimization: Early approaches (Gao et al., 2022; Gui et al., 2022) used DPR or CLIP 41136 Question :                        

> Who is in charge of
> maintaining this
> park?
> Fine -Grained Section Re -ranking Multimodal Section Reassessment
> Tags: city park,
> chair, people ……
> ……
> Question Image
> Visual
> Encoder
> ##Section Title: Conse rvancy
> Abingdon Square Conse rvancy is a non -profit public
> charity exempt from federal income tax under
> Section 501(c)(3) of the Inte rnal Revenue Code . The
> Conse rvancy's mission … .
> ##Section Title: History
> Ne w York City acquired the land on which the park
> resides on April 22, 1831 , and it was enclose d with
> a cas t -iron fence in 18 36. In the 1 880s, an effort
> was initiated ...
> Top 20
> Articles
> Q-Former
> Sections
> Late -Interaction
> [CLS]
> Top 5
> Sections
> Multimodal
> Encoder
> Multimodal
> Encoder
> Image Question
> Sections Cover images
> Dot -Product
> Similarity Score
> Top 1
> Sections
> Answers
> Generator
> Image
> ……
> Text
> 1×768
> 512 ×768
> MatMul&Scale
> Mask&Select
> Learned Queries
> Self Attention
> Cross Attention
> Feed Forward 32 ×768
> F-Adapter Module
> Image &Question
> Contrastive learning on fine -grained section re -ranking
> WIKIPEDIA
> [Q]

~ Random  Select 

~ Select  from  Visually Similar Instances 

~                

> Select based on Generator Feedback
> [Q]
> [Q]
> Positive
> Sample Negatives Sample
> Ican’t determine if the context
> is incorrect .
> Easy
> Hard
> Progressive Multi -modal Re -ranking Framework
> •Decoding rank perturbation
> •Average log -likelihood
> CLIP -based Visual Broad -
> Scope Search
> Q-Former
> F-Adapter
> Q-Former
> F-Adapter

Figure 2: The overview of our progressive multimodal re-ranking framework for LLM generations. The contributions are: a progressive multimodal re-ranking framework based on multi-perspective, multi-granularity alignment; and a curriculum learning optimization strategy for the re-ranking contrastive training. 

architectures to achieve fine-grained feature align-ment between multimodal queries and textual knowledge. Wiki-LLaVA (Caffagni et al., 2024) pioneered hierarchical retrieval based on CLIP and Contriever (Izacard et al., 2022), refining the re-trieved Wikipedia corpus through segmentation. Others (Yan and Xie, 2024; Yang et al., 2025) em-ploy trainable Q-Former (Li et al., 2023) modules and multi-stage re-ranking strategies to improve recall performance with Wikipedia corpora. (2) Knowledge fusion optimization: mR2AG (Zhang et al., 2024b) introduces a multimodal retrieval-reflection-augmented generation process, using special tokens to identify whether knowledge para-graphs should be introduced, enabling adaptive re-trieval. MMKB-RAG (Ling et al., 2025) leverages the inherent knowledge of MLLMs and employs a three-stage process to determine retrieval necessity and relevance, ensuring accurate and robust multi-modal reasoning. Our method focuses on retriever performance optimization, improving accuracy by introducing a multi-level, fine-grained, progressive multimodal retrieval framework. 

3 Proposed Method 

We propose a progressive re-ranking framework for multimodal retrieval-augmented generation, as illustrated in Figure 2. Considering the mul-timodal and multi-granularity nature of queries and Wikipedia corpora, the system introduces a multi-perspective progressive multimodal retrieval method to extract the most relevant multimodal in-formation and feed it into the generator as a contex-tual prompt. In this section, we first briefly describe the process of retrieval-augmented VQA, then de-tail the progressive multimodal retrieval strategy, and demonstrate how to train the re-ranking mod-ule to robustly evaluate relevant knowledge para-graphs. 

3.1 Problem Formulation Retriever MR: Given an image I and a ques-tion q, the retriever identifies relevant knowledge from a knowledge corpus K through a multi-stage retrieval and re-ranking strategy. The knowledge corpus K, derived from Wikipedia web pages, con-tains N entities, each with a textual description and associated images: K = {d1, d 2, . . . , d N } =

{(p1, t 1), (p2, t 2), . . . , (pN , t N )}, where di repre-sents the i-th knowledge entity, ti represents the textual explanation, and pi represents the associ-ated images. The retriever encodes both the mul-timodal query (I, q ) and the knowledge entity di,evaluating their relevance using a similarity assess-ment function: score i = MR(I, q, d i). The docu-ment d with the highest score is typically selected as input for the generator. 

Generator MG: The retrieved document d is con-catenated with the query, enabling the generator to produce an answer: y = MG(I, q ◦ d). To fur-ther enhance response accuracy, LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) is introduced as learnable parameters within the LLMs. The model is trained using the cross-entropy loss: 

LCE = − 1

N

N∑

i=1 

V∑

j=1 

yij log pij , (1) where N is the number of training examples, V is the vocabulary size, yij represents the target distri-41137 bution of the j-th token in the i-th training example, and pij represents the predicted probability. 

3.2 Progressive Re-ranking Framework 

CLIP (Sun et al., 2023) is commonly used for visual coarse-grained search. Specifically, the CLIP mod-els encode all reference images {p1, p 2, . . . , p N }

in the Wikipedia corpus and the multimodal query (I, q ) into global embeddings: vI , v ip =

CLIP v(I, p i), v q = CLIP t(q). These multimodal query vectors contribute equally to the retrieval of knowledge base images through simple averaging: 

sim p(I, q, p i) = 

( 12

[ vI

∥vI ∥2

+ vq

∥vq∥2

]) ⊤ vpi

∥vpi ∥2

,

(2) where vI is the CLIP visual embedding of the in-put image I, vq is the CLIP textual embedding of the question q, and vpi is the visual embedding of the i-th candidate image. All embeddings are 

L2-normalized before similarity computation. To better capture the multimodal nature of the query, we leverage MLLMs (Liu et al., 2023) to generate image tags related to the question, sup-plementing the textual query. Finally, we use a FAISS index (Douze et al., 2024) for efficient vi-sual entity retrieval, retaining the top 20 most rel-evant images and their corresponding Wikipedia articles. We then employ a fine-grained progres-sive re-ranking framework with fine-grained sec-tion re-ranking and multimodal section re-ranking to efficiently improve retrieval accuracy. 

Fine-Grained Section Re-ranking: The top 20 Wikipedia articles from the initial retrieval are divided into a candidate set of textual sections 

S = {s1, s 2, . . . , s M }, where M denotes the num-ber of sections. We then employ a fine-grained late-interaction approach to identify the most rel-evant section using the multimodal query. This approach utilizes learnable embedding vectors to represent fine-grained image and text features. A late-interaction mechanism, similar to ColBERT (Khattab and Zaharia, 2020), is used to calculate similarity scores and re-rank the candidate sections. Specifically, the Q-Former (Li et al., 2023) framework first extracts image features from the in-put image I using a frozen ViT architecture (Doso-vitskiy et al., 2021). Then, a set of learnable query embedding vectors interacts with these image fea-tures through cross-attention, generating 32 aggre-gated visual embeddings: 

{ziI }32  

> i=1

= Q-Former (I, q ), (3) where ziI represents the i-th visual token em-bedding of image I conditioned on the question 

q. These vectors, pre-trained via image-text con-trastive learning, capture rich image information and are aligned with textual embedding vectors generated by the same architecture. Furthermore, the Q-Former generates 512 tex-tual token-level embeddings for both the question 

q and each candidate section s:

{ziq}512 

> i=1

, {zis}512  

> i=1

= Q-Former (q, s ), (4) where ziq and zis denote the i-th token-level embed-dings of the question q and candidate section s,respectively. To reduce noise and computation, we further retain only the top 32 question and section tokens most relevant to the visual query. Considering that the [CLS] embedding may not fully capture the semantic information of the text, and that using all token-level embeddings for fine-grained similarity calculation can be noisy and computationally expensive, we retain the top 32 question and section token embeddings, denoted as 

{ˆziq}32  

> i=1

and {ˆzis}32 

> i=1

, based on their cosine similar-ity to the image [CLS] embedding z0 

> I

.Inspired by the Q-Former architecture, we intro-duce a smaller aggregation module, F-Adapter , to generate more compact textual embeddings. This module consists of a set of learnable query embed-ding vectors and a stack of N transformer layers. It interacts with the selected token-level textual embeddings through cross-attention to produce ag-gregated textual embeddings: 

{˜ziq}32  

> i=1

= F-Adapter ({ˆzjq }32 

> j=1

) ,

{˜zis}32  

> i=1

= F-Adapter ({ˆzjs }32 

> j=1

) , (5) where ˜ziq and ˜zis are the aggregated textual embed-dings produced by the F-Adapter. The fine-grained multimodal similarity score 

sim s between the multimodal query eq =

{ziI }32  

> i=1

∪ { ˜ziq}32  

> i=1

and a candidate section es =

{˜zis}32  

> i=1

is calculated using late-interaction. This approach uses a Max-Sum operation to integrate inter-token relationships into a unified similarity measure: 

sim s(eq, e s) = 

> lq

∑

> i=1

max 

> 1≤j≤ls

eiq · (ejs)T , (6) where eq is the multimodal query representation composed of visual token embeddings {ziI }32 

> i=1

and question-side aggregated textual embeddings 41138 {˜ziq}32 

> i=1

, es is the section representation com-posed of section-side aggregated textual embed-dings {˜zis}32 

> i=1

, and lq and ls denote the numbers of embeddings in eq and es, respectively. In our implementation, lq = 64 and ls = 32 .Finally, sim s(eq, e s) is combined with a visual entity similarity score sim p(I, q, p ) in a weighted manner to produce the final candidate section simi-larity score: 

sim total = λ sim p(I, q, p ) + (1 − λ) sim s(eq, e s),

(7) where λ ∈ [0 , 1] balances the contributions of vi-sual similarity and fine-grained section similarity. In our experiments, λ is treated as a fixed, dataset-dependent hyperparameter and is set differently across datasets, as described in Appendix A.3. 

Multimodal Section Reassessment: To incorpo-rate visual knowledge information, we extract the cover images corresponding to the top 5 Wikipedia sections identified by the previous re-ranking. These image-section pairs are then used for a mul-timodal reassessment process. We use the pre-trained multimodal re-ranking model (Bai et al., 2023) to generate global representations for both the multimodal query and the candidate sections and then calculate the cosine similarity. Finally, a voting strategy combines the results of the initial and multimodal re-ranking stages to select the most relevant section. This selected section is then con-catenated with the question to serve as the input context for the generator. 

3.3 Contrastive Training Strategy for the Multimodal Re-ranking 

We use contrastive learning to train the fine-grained section re-ranking module. Following the stan-dard contrastive learning setup, we select annotated queries D and their corresponding Wikipedia sec-tions from the training corpus as positive samples. We employ visual coarse-grained search to obtain 

k1 sections as negative samples, which are similar with the positive samples but lack direct semantic associations, fail to provide valuable knowledge for LLM generation. Furthermore, to guide the retriever in distinguish-ing more challenging sections, we adopt a curricu-lum learning (Bengio et al., 2009) setting to further increase the difficulty of negative samples. We de-fine difficult negative samples as sections that are semantically similar to positive samples but contain misleading information, which LLMs are challeng-ing to identify and may generate high-confidence but incorrect responses. We leverage a decoding rank elevation strategy and generation likelihood to assess knowledge effectiveness. Unlike previous methods (Zhang et al., 2024a; Wang et al., 2025), which evaluate document quality based on the gen-eration results without the knowledge supplement, our task focuses on identifying hard negative sam-ples that exhibit subtle differences from the positive sample. To eliminate the spurious positives caused by the generator’s internal implicit knowledge, we use LLMs (Grattafiori et al., 2024) that only in-troduce questions and paragraphs as input context without visual information to evaluate the validity of the sections. Specifically, we sample N candidate outputs 

{ˆy(m)}Nm=1 conditioned on the question q together with either the positive section s+ or a visually similar negative section s−. For each sampled out-put ˆy(m) = (ˆ y(m)1 , . . . , ˆy(m) 

> Tm

) with length Tm, we compute its average token log-likelihood (used as a confidence score) under evidence section s:

ℓ(ˆ y(m); q, s ) = 1

TmTm∑

> t=1

log P

(

ˆy(m) 

> t

| ˆy(m) 

> <t

, q ◦ s

)

,

(8) where ˆy(m) is the m-th sampled output, Tm is its length, and q ◦ s denotes the concatenation of the question and the section. Based on this confidence score, we rank the N sampled outputs in descending order of 

ℓ(ˆ y(m); q, s ) and compute the rank of the expected (gold) answer y∗:

R(s) = 1 + 

> N

∑

> m=1

I

[

ℓ(ˆ y(m); q, s ) > ℓ (y∗; q, s )

]

,

(9) where N is the number of sampled outputs and I[·]

is the indicator function. We then define the decoding rank perturbation induced by a negative section s− as the rank differ-ence between the negative and positive sections: 

∆R(s−) = R(s−) − R(s+), (10) where s+ denotes the positive section and s− de-notes a negative section. A larger ∆R(s−) indi-cates that the negative section is more difficult for the LLM to distinguish from the positive one. We rank negative samples in descending order of ∆R(s−); ties are further broken by the confi-dence score (e.g., ℓ(y∗; q, s −)). We then sample a 41139 subset of negatives from the training set to obtain the k2 hardest negatives, and further optimize the re-ranking module with a contrastive loss to adapt to the generator’s prediction preferences. 

4 Experiments 

Datasets: The InfoSeek dataset (Chen et al., 2023) comprises 1.3 million image-question pairs, cov-ering over 11,000 visual entities from OVEN (Hu et al., 2023). Following prior work, we utilize a controlled Wikipedia knowledge base of 100,000 articles as the knowledge source. The Enc-VQA dataset (Mensink et al., 2023) contains 221,000 question-answer pairs and 2 million Wikipedia ar-ticles, with images sourced from iNaturalist 2021 (Van Horn et al., 2021) and Google Landmarks Dataset V2 (Weyand et al., 2020). Each question-answer pair in Enc-VQA is annotated with the precise knowledge source. For a fair comparison, we adopt the training/testing split used in previous studies (Yan and Xie, 2024); sample statistics and evaluation metrics are presented in the appendix. 

Implementation Details: We employ LLaVA-1.5-7B (Liu et al., 2023) to generate image-related tags and Eva-CLIP-8B (Sun et al., 2023) to generate image and text embeddings, extracting the top 20 articles with the highest similarity as a candidate set. The fine-grained section re-ranking module is initialized with pre-trained BLIP-2 (Li et al., 2023) parameters and trained on the Enc-VQA dataset. Notably, since InfoSeek lacks paragraph-level an-notations, we adopt a zero-shot transfer approach. The multimodal reassessment stage utilizes the bge-qwen-vl-2b (Bai et al., 2023) for feature extraction. During the answer generation stage, we use a pre-trained LLaMA3-8B (Grattafiori et al., 2024) and a LoRA-fine-tuned LLaVA-1.5-7B (Liu et al., 2023) for inference. During training, we randomly sam-pled k1 = 24 sections as negative samples and trained for 6 epochs. To improve efficiency, we sampled a subset of 100,000 samples and extracted 

k2 = 4 sections as hard negative samples, train-ing for 1 epoch. The experimental training is con-ducted on two NVIDIA H20 80GB GPUs. Prompt settings and further training details are provided in the Appendix. 

4.1 Comparison with State-of-the-Art Methods 

Table 1 compares the VQA performance of our proposed method against several state-of-the-art approaches. Our method primarily focuses on ef-fectively localizing relevant knowledge and enhanc-ing VQA accuracy through a progressive multi-modal re-ranking strategy and curriculum learning incorporating decoding rank perturbation. The re-sults demonstrate that our framework consistently achieves superior performance across two datasets, demonstrating the significant potential of enhanc-ing multimodal retrieval for improved answer ac-curacy. Specifically, our method achieves optimal VQA performance with LLMs in a zero-shot set-ting on the Enc-VQA dataset, without explicitly incorporating visual information during generation. 

4.2 Retrieval Performance Analysis 

Table 2 presents the performance outcomes of vari-ous retrieval methods. The methods OMGM (Yang et al., 2025) and ReflectiVA (Cocchi et al., 2025), which employ ChatGPT to generate textual sum-maries for all Wikipedia articles, exhibit superior performance compared to other retrievers with-out preprocessing. Our methodology primarily compares performance with baselines that utilize Wikipedia images for initial retrieval. By incorpo-rating image tags as supplementary data, our visual coarse-grained search method achieves an enhance-ment of 2.5% in Recall@20 for Enc-VQA and 4% for Infoseek. Additionally, our progressive re-ranking strategy significantly improves Recall@1 performance and consistently outperforms the base-line. Specifically, our approach overcomes the performance bottleneck of initial visual retrieval through a two-stage re-ranking strategy, achiev-ing superior Recall@1 performance compared to OMEM (Yang et al., 2025). This demonstrates that our progressive re-ranking strategy effectively fil-ters relevant documents from the initial retrieval re-sults, ensuring the quality of knowledge ultimately fed into the generator, even with imperfect initial retrieval. 

4.3 Ablation Study Contribution of different retrieval stages to VQA results: Table 3 evaluates the contribution of different retrieval strategies to VQA results. The results indicate that incorporating Wikipedia knowledge enhances answer generation, as it pro-vides valuable external information to the model. The progressive, multimodal re-ranking strategy focuses on refining the precision of relevant sec-tions to provide reliable and low-noise informa-tion for subsequent generation. The fine-grained 41140 Model LLM Enc-VQA InfoSeek Unseen-q Unseen-e Overall                                                   

> Retrieval process optimization.
> RoRA-VLM (Qi et al., 2024) Llava-1.5-7b †20.3 27.3 25.1 -Wiki-LLaVA (Caffagni et al., 2024) Vicuna-7B †21.8 30.1 27.8 28.9 EchoSight (Yan and Xie, 2024) LLaMA3-8B 41.8 --31.3 OMGM (Yang et al., 2025) LLaMA3-8B 49.94 35.26 33.61 34.42 OMGM (Yang et al., 2025) LLaVA-1.5-7B-FT †50.17 43.46 43.53 43.49
> Generation process optimization.
> mR2AG (Zhang et al., 2024b) Llava-1.5-7b †-40.6 39.8 40.2 ReflectiVA (Cocchi et al., 2025) LLaMA-3.1-8B †35.5 40.4 39.8 40.1 MMKB-RAG (Ling et al., 2025) Qwen2-7B †39.7 36.4 36.3 36.4 Ours LLaMA3-8B 50.32 36.42 33.81 35.07 Ours LLaVA-1.5-7B-FT †50.21 46.99 44.22 45.56

Table 1: VQA performance comparison with SOTA methods. † indicates that the LLMs are fine-tuned on domain-specific datasets. Our proposed method achieved the highest prediction performance on the Enc-VQA and InfoSeek benchmarks. 

Model Recall@K on Enc-VQA Recall@K on InfoSeek K=1 K=5 K=20 K=1 K=5 K=20 

Retrieved from query to Wikipedia summary generated from ChatGPT. 

ReflectiVA (Cocchi et al., 2025) 15.6 36.1 49.8 56.1 77.6 86.4 OMGM (Yang et al., 2025) w/o. re-ranking 19.1 41.2 58.7 52.6 73.9 84.8 OMGM (Yang et al., 2025) w. re-ranking 42.8 55.7 58.7 64.0 80.8 84.8 

Retrieved from query to Wikipedia images. 

EVA-CLIP-8B I-T (Sun et al., 2023) 3.3 7.7 16.5 32.0 54.0 68.2 EchoSight (Yan and Xie, 2024) w/o. re-ranking 13.3 31.3 48.8 45.6 67.1 77.9 EchoSight (Yan and Xie, 2024) w. re-ranking 36.5 47.9 48.8 53.2 74.0 77.9 Ours w/o. re-ranking 13.4 33.7 51.3 46.7 70.5 81.9 Ours w. re-ranking 43.6 50.1 51.3 66.4 78.5 81.9 

Table 2: Retrieval results on the Enc-VQA and InfoSeek datasets. The underline indicates the best performance among all multimodal retrieval methods. ReflectiVA and OMGM achieve excellent performance in the initial retrieval process by introducing article summaries from the entire knowledge corpus. Our approach achieved the highest recall performance compared to other methods that retrieve images within the knowledge base as preliminary results. Simultaneously, our two-stage re-ranking strategy delivered the best performance on the Recall@1 metric. 

Method Enc-VQA InfoSeek 

LLaMA3-8B ZS 18.78 1.56 + Top1 article of step1 20.17 29.29 + Top1 section of step2 46.59 32.35 + Top1 section of step3 50.32 35.07 

Table 3: Contribution of different retrieval stages to VQA results under the LLaMA3-8B zero-shot setting. The introduction and iterative refinement of knowledge retrieval significantly enhance answer generation accu-racy. 

section re-ranking module significantly improved performance, demonstrating the effectiveness of its design and training. 

Contribution of fine-grained late-interaction ap-proach for re-ranking: We evaluated the impact of two settings on search results: (i) direct similar-

Methods R@1 R@5 R@20 

CLS Emb & ICL 57.2 76.8 81.9 Late-Interaction 59.0 78.2 81.9 

Table 4: ICL or Late-Interaction settings for multimodal section re-ranking on the Infoseek. 

ity computation using text CLS embeddings and (ii) fine-grained similarity score calculation via late interaction. Results presented in Table 4 demon-strate that the late-interaction approach, through a more comprehensive and fine-grained token-level similarity comparison, more accurately identifies the semantic information expressed within the sec-tion. Consequently, the weighted fusion of this refined textual similarity with the visual similarity score yields superior retrieval performance. 

Impact of negative sampling strategies on fine-41141 Sample Strategies R@1 R@5 R@20 

Random Select 53.5 74.3 81.9 Visually Similar Entries 57.6 77.5 81.9 Generator Feedback 59.0 78.2 81.9 

Table 5: Impact of negative sampling strategies for In-foSeek. Sampling difficult negative examples can guide the retriever to identify sections that are visually or se-mantically similar but contain misleading content. 

Number of samples K R@1 R@5 

50,000 4 58.32 77.81 50,000 9 58.57 77.94 100,000 4 59.07 78.28 

100,000 9 59.14 78.17 200,000 4 59.11 78.24 

Table 6: The effect of the number of hard negative samples on recall metrics. 

grained section re-ranking: Table 5 assesses the impact of negative sample selection strategies for the fine-grained section re-ranking on InfoSeek’s overall retrieval performance after the second stage. Instead of randomly sampling Wikipedia articles, we implemented a curriculum learning strategy with negative sampling at increasing difficulty lev-els. This approach initially trains the retriever to differentiate between similar visual knowledge enti-ties and subsequently enhances its ability to discern texts with subtle inconsistencies. This curriculum learning approach improves the generalization per-formance of the re-ranking module. Furthermore, Table 6 demonstrates that training with a small sample of hard negative examples can achieve sig-nificant performance gains at a manageable cost. 

Comparison of retrieval efficiency and perfor-mance across different multimodal RAG ap-proaches: Table 7 illustrates the retrieval efficiency and performance comparison between two multi-modal re-ranking methods. Despite adopting a stepwise retrieval strategy, our method incurs only minimal additional retrieval overhead with small-scale re-ranking while delivering significantly su-perior VQA results. This demonstrates that our approach achieves an effective balance between retrieval efficiency and performance. 

4.4 Quantitative Result Analysis 

We present a comparison of our method’s answer generation on real-world examples from the Enc-VQA dataset against state-of-the-art VLMs, includ-

Methods Avg Time R@1 VQA Score 

EchoSight 0.429 36.5 41.8 Ours 0.496 43.6 50.32 

Table 7: Comparison of retrieval efficiency and per-formance across various multimodal re-ranking meth-ods. Our approach provides significant improvements in VQA performance while incurring only a minimal increase in retrieval time. Q:  In which year(s) was this castle                        

> rebuilt?
> A: 1949
> Wiki Ref:
> https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nowy
> _Wi%C5%9Bnicz_Castle
> The castle in the image is the Nowy Wiśnicz Castle, located in
> Poland. It was rebuilt in the years 1615 -1621.
> Top 1section: …After World War II, the castle was seized by
> the state, and from the year of 1949, renovation was conducted by
> Alfred Majewski, which was to restore the castle to …
> Answer: 1949
> I apologize, but I cannot provide the specific year(s) this castle was
> rebuilt based solely on the image. The photograph shows a beautiful
> castle with Renaissance or Baroque architectural elements, but it
> doesn't contain any information about its reconstruction dates.
> GPT -4o
> Claude 3.5
> Sonnet
> Ours
> Q: When was this house built?
> A: between 1556 and 1560
> Wiki Ref:
> https:// en.wikipedia.org /wiki/ Pack
> wood_House
> I'm sorry, but I can't determine the exact construction date of the
> house from the image alone. To find out when this house was built,
> you might need to look up historical records, property records, or
> any plaques or markers that might be on the building itself.
> Top 1section: …The house began as a modest timber -framed
> farmhouse constructed for John Fetherston between 1556 and
> 1560. The last member of the Fetherston …
> Answer: 1556 and 1560
> Based solely on the image, it's not possible to determine the exact
> year this house was built. However, the architectural style and
> materials used suggest that this building is likely quite old,
> possibly dating back to the 17th or 18th century.
> GPT -4o
> Ours

Figure 3: Quantitative result analysis on Enc-VQA datasets. 

ing GPT-4o and Claude-3.5, as illustrated in Figure 3. These cases highlight the effectiveness of our approach in addressing complex questions. For instance, precise paragraph localization mitigates knowledge deficiencies during the generation pro-cess of LLMs and VLMs, leading to improved pre-diction accuracy. 

5 Conclusion 

This paper introduces a progressive multimodal re-ranking framework for knowledge-based VQA. The system focuses on optimizing retrieval per-formance over the multi-modal knowledge corpus, introducing a progressive, multi-granularity multi-modal retrieval framework. To enhance the perfor-mance of the retriever, we fine-tune a small-scale re-ranking module by introducing a curriculum learn-ing training strategy, guiding the retrieval module to better understand multi-modal query intent at a low cost. Compared to other existing research on the InfoSeek and Enc-VQA datasets, our method achieves significant improvements in VQA perfor-mance, demonstrating the superiority of the pro-posed method. This research provides new insights into the rational design of multi-modal re-ranking modules and the layout of retrieval processes. 41142 Limitations 

Despite its strong performance, our method still has two main limitations. First, the overall upper bound is constrained by the quality of visual coarse-grained retrieval. To balance efficiency and perfor-mance, we do not substantially expand the initial re-trieval scope, which leaves room for improvement in later stages. Second, hard-negative sampling based on decoding-rank perturbation is computa-tionally expensive because it relies on LLM infer-ence, making it difficult to scale to the full training corpus. Moreover, the current sampling strategy is static. Future work could explore dynamic hard-negative selection based on generator feedback, for example through reinforcement learning. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported in part by the Beijing Ma-jor Science and Technology Project under Contract no. Z251100008125025. 

References 

Stanislaw Antol, Aishwarya Agrawal, Jiasen Lu, Mar-garet Mitchell, Dhruv Batra, C Lawrence Zitnick, and Devi Parikh. 2015. VQA: Visual question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision , pages 2425–2433. Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenbin Ge, Yu Han, Fei Huang, and 1 others. 2023. Qwen technical report. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609 .Yoshua Bengio, Jérôme Louradour, Ronan Collobert, and Jason Weston. 2009. Curriculum learning. In 

Proceedings of the 26th annual international confer-ence on machine learning , pages 41–48. Davide Caffagni, Federico Cocchi, Nicholas Moratelli, Sara Sarto, Marcella Cornia, Lorenzo Baraldi, and Rita Cucchiara. 2024. Wiki-LLaVA: Hierarchi-cal retrieval-augmented generation for multimodal LLMs. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Work-shops , pages 1818–1826. Yang Chen, Hexiang Hu, Yi Luan, Haitian Sun, Soravit Changpinyo, Alan Ritter, and Ming-Wei Chang. 2023. Can pre-trained vision and language models answer visual information-seeking questions? In Proceed-ings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 14948–14968. Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebas-tian Gehrmann, and 1 others. 2023. PaLM: Scaling language modeling with pathways. Journal of Ma-chine Learning Research , 24(240):1–113. Federico Cocchi, Nicholas Moratelli, Marcella Cornia, Lorenzo Baraldi, and Rita Cucchiara. 2025. Aug-menting multimodal llms with self-reflective tokens for knowledge-based visual question answering. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 9199– 9209. Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, and 1 others. 2021. An image is worth 16x16 words: Trans-formers for image recognition at scale. International Conference on Learning Representations .Matthijs Douze, Alexandr Guzhva, Chengqi Deng, Jeff Johnson, Gergely Szilvasy, Pierre-Emmanuel Mazaré, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, and Hervé Jégou. 2024. The Faiss library. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.08281 .Feng Gao, Qing Ping, Govind Thattai, Aishwarya Re-ganti, Ying Nian Wu, and Prem Natarajan. 2022. Transform-retrieve-generate: Natural language-centric outside-knowledge visual question answer-ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 5067–5077. Yash Goyal, Tejas Khot, Douglas Summers-Stay, Dhruv Batra, and Devi Parikh. 2017. Making the V in VQA matter: Elevating the role of image understanding in visual question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 6904–6913. Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, and 1 others. 2024. The Llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 .Liangke Gui, Borui Wang, Qiuyuan Huang, Alexan-der G Hauptmann, Yonatan Bisk, and Jianfeng Gao. 2022. Kat: A knowledge augmented transformer for vision-and-language. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 956–968. Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen, and 1 others. 2022. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. The Tenth In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations ,1(2):3. Hexiang Hu, Yi Luan, Yang Chen, Urvashi Khandel-wal, Mandar Joshi, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, and Ming-Wei Chang. 2023. Open-domain visual entity recognition: Towards recognizing millions of Wikipedia entities. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF 41143 International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 12065–12075. Gautier Izacard, Mathilde Caron, Lucas Hosseini, Sebas-tian Riedel, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand Joulin, and Edouard Grave. 2022. Unsupervised dense informa-tion retrieval with contrastive learning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Omar Khattab and Matei Zaharia. 2020. ColBERT: Efficient and effective passage search via contextu-alized late interaction over BERT. In Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in Information Retrieval ,pages 39–48. Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. 2023. BLIP-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large lan-guage models. In International conference on ma-chine learning , pages 19730–19742. PMLR. Zihan Ling, Zhiyao Guo, Yixuan Huang, Yi An, Shuai Xiao, Jinsong Lan, Xiaoyong Zhu, and Bo Zheng. 2025. Mmkb-rag: A multi-modal knowledge-based retrieval-augmented generation framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.10074 .Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. 2023. Visual instruction tuning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:34892– 34916. Kenneth Marino, Mohammad Rastegari, Ali Farhadi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. 2019. OK-VQA: A visual question answering benchmark requiring external knowledge. In Proceedings of the IEEE/cvf con-ference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pages 3195–3204. Thomas Mensink, Jasper Uijlings, Lluis Castrejon, Arushi Goel, Felipe Cadar, Howard Zhou, Fei Sha, André Araujo, and Vittorio Ferrari. 2023. Encyclope-dic VQA: Visual questions about detailed properties of fine-grained categories. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 3113–3124. Jingyuan Qi, Zhiyang Xu, Rulin Shao, Yang Chen, Jin Di, Yu Cheng, Qifan Wang, and Lifu Huang. 2024. RoRA-VLM: Robust retrieval-augmented vision lan-guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.08876 .Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sas-try, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, and 1 others. 2021. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning , pages 8748–8763. PmLR. Dustin Schwenk, Apoorv Khandelwal, Christopher Clark, Kenneth Marino, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. 2022. A-OKVQA: A benchmark for visual question answer-ing using world knowledge. In European conference on computer vision , pages 146–162. Springer. Quan Sun, Yuxin Fang, Ledell Wu, Xinlong Wang, and Yue Cao. 2023. EVA-CLIP: Improved train-ing techniques for CLIP at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15389 .Grant Van Horn, Elijah Cole, Sara Beery, Kimberly Wilber, Serge Belongie, and Oisin Mac Aodha. 2021. Benchmarking representation learning for natural world image collections. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pat-tern recognition , pages 12884–12893. Shaohan Wang, Licheng Zhang, Zheren Fu, and Zhen-dong Mao. 2025. Dacl-rag: Data augmentation strat-egy with curriculum learning for retrieval-augmented generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.10493 .Tobias Weyand, Andre Araujo, Bingyi Cao, and Jack Sim. 2020. Google landmarks dataset v2-a large-scale benchmark for instance-level recognition and retrieval. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-ence on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pages 2575–2584. Yibin Yan and Weidi Xie. 2024. EchoSight: Advanc-ing visual-language models with wiki knowledge. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 1538–1551. Wei Yang, Jingjing Fu, Rui Wang, Jinyu Wang, Lei Song, and Jiang Bian. 2025. OMGM: Orchestrate multiple granularities and modalities for efficient multimodal retrieval. In Proceedings of the 63rd An-nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 24545– 24563. Peitian Zhang, Zheng Liu, Shitao Xiao, Zhicheng Dou, and Jian-Yun Nie. 2024a. A multi-task embedder for retrieval augmented LLMs. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3537–3553. Tao Zhang, Ziqi Zhang, Zongyang Ma, Yuxin Chen, Zhongang Qi, Chunfeng Yuan, Bing Li, Junfu Pu, Yuxuan Zhao, Zehua Xie, and 1 others. 2024b. mR 2AG: Multimodal retrieval-reflection-augmented generation for knowledge-based VQA. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15041 .

A Appendix 

A.1 Dataset setup InfoSeek Dataset : The InfoSeek dataset comprises 1.3 million samples derived from a Wikipedia cor-pus. Given the non-public availability of the orig-inal external knowledge base, we utilize 100,000 Wikipedia articles provided by EchoSight as our knowledge source. This dataset features 8.9K human-authored visual information-seeking ques-tions and 1.3M automatically generated questions, partitioned into training, validation, and test sets. 41144 # QA Pairs Knowledge Corpus # Ret Train # Gen Train # Valid # Test # Train # Valid 

InfoSeek - 10k - 71335 100k 100k Enc-VQA 901674 10k 11696 4750 2M 2M 

> Table 8: Dataset statistics for InfoSeek and Enc-VQA datasets.

Following established protocols, we employ the validation set for experimental evaluation. This validation set is further divided into two distinct subsets: Unseen Entity and Unseen Question. We report evaluation results separately for each of these subsets. During the fine-tuning phase for LLaVa, we randomly select 100,000 questions from the training set for training. Acknowledging the ab-sence of section-level annotations in the labeled data, we employ a trained retriever to identify the most relevant sections, which are then incorporated as supplementary contextual information. 

Enc-VQA Dataset : Enc-VQA comprises 221,000 question-answer pairs and 2 million Wikipedia articles and encompasses questions pertaining to 16.7K distinct entities. The dataset features a di-verse range of question-answering tasks, including single-hop, two-hop, and multi-answer questions. Consistent with prior work, our evaluation focuses solely on single-hop and multi-answer question types, excluding two-hop questions that necessi-tate more extensive retrieval and reasoning pro-cesses. Enc-VQA provides associated Wikipedia articles, fine-grained section annotations, and sup-porting fact information for each question-answer pair, which we leverage for model training and eval-uation. Acknowledging the challenges associated with downloading corresponding images for all can-didate paragraphs, we employ pre-extracted CLIP features of all image entities from EchoSight for vi-sual coarse-grained search. Subsequently, only the cover images of the Wikipedia articles associated with the top 5 candidate paragraphs are considered as visual references corresponding to the section during the multi-modal section re-ranking stage. Comprehensive statistics for both datasets are presented in Table 8. 

A.2 Evaluation Metrics Recall : We evaluate the retrieval performance us-ing the standard Recall@K metric. Specifically, Recall@K measures the proportion of queries for which the correct, ground-truth Wikipedia article link is found within the top K retrieved results. A retrieval is considered successful only if there is an exact string match between the retrieved link and the ground-truth link. 

Answer Accuracy on InfoSeek : To evaluate an-swer accuracy on the InfoSeek dataset, we employ different metrics depending on the question type. For questions requiring string or temporal answers, we use the VQA accuracy metric. For questions requiring numerical answers, we use the relaxed accuracy metric. 

Answer Accuracy on Enc-VQA : To evaluate an-swer accuracy on the Enc-VQA dataset, we employ different metrics depending on the question type. For simple, single-hop questions, we use BERT Matching (BEM) to assess the semantic similar-ity between the predicted answer and the ground-truth answer. This allows us to consider answers that are semantically equivalent but phrased differ-ently as correct. For multi-answer questions, the model’s output is first transformed into a list of answers through string splitting. We then calculate the Intersection-over-Union (IoU) between the pre-dicted answer set and the ground-truth answer set. If the IoU is greater than or equal to 0.5, the answer is considered correct. Otherwise, the BEM score is used to evaluate the correctness of the answer. 

A.3 Experimental Hyperparameters and Training Setup Retrieval Stage : During the re-ranking module training, we randomly sampled 24 visually simi-lar passages as negative samples from a training dataset of 900,000 instances. Additionally, we sam-pled 4 semantically similar passages as hard neg-ative samples from a 100,000-instance subset of the training data. The training process employed a learning rate of 1e-5 and a batch size of 8. Ini-tially, the model was trained for 6 epochs on the entire training set using only the negative samples to facilitate comprehensive learning of retrieval requirements across diverse image and question types. To adhere to a curriculum learning paradigm and construct negative samples with varying dif-ficulty gradients, we progressively used the hard 41145 negative sample subset during the subsequent 1 training epochs. This progressive training strat-egy aims to guide the retriever towards identifying a wider range of more challenging Wikipedia ar-ticles, thereby enhancing the system’s recall and generalization performance. Each training epoch required an average of 30 hours to complete on a single Nvidia H20 (80G) GPU. During inference, the weighting factor λ was set to 0.74 for InfoS-eek and 0.56 for Enc-VQA, reflecting the relative contributions of visual and textual similarity. 

Generation Stage : For the LLaVA training phase, we randomly selected 100,000 samples from each of the two datasets to serve as training data. We employed LoRA for fine-tuning the LLM, with the following parameter settings: r = 128 and alpha = 256. The learning rate was set to 2e-5, the batch size to 16, and the total number of epochs to 1. 

A.4 Prompt Engineering 

To guide the LLMs and VLLMs in generating relevant responses during image tagging and an-swer generation, we employed specific prompt tem-plates, leveraging a prompt engineering approach. The prompt templates utilized for each task are detailed below: 

Image Tag Generation using LLaVA-1.5-7B: 

You are an image tag generator, and your task is to provide tags related to the image according to the question, thereby helping to retrieve relevant knowledge. Image: {} Question: {} Directly provide 5 related image tags, use ’,’ as the separator: 

LLaMA Generation on InfoSeek Dataset: 

You are a helpful assistant for answering ency-clopedic questions. Do not answer anything else. If you need to answer questions about numbers or time, please output the corresponding numerical format directly. If the context does not contain the information required to answer the question, you should answer the question using internal model knowledge. There is an example: - Context: # Wiki Article: Dolomites ## Section Title: Dolomites The Dolomites, also known as the Dolomite Mountains, Dolomite Alps or Dolomitic Alps, are a mountain range located in northeast-ern Italy. The Dolomites are located in the re-gions of Veneto, Trentino-Alto Adige Südtirol and Friuli Venezia Giulia, covering an area shared be-tween the provinces of Belluno, Vicenza, Verona, Trentino, South Tyrol, Udine and Pordenone. - Question: Which city or region is this mountain located in? Just answer the question. No explanation is needed. Short answer is: Province of Belluno - Context: {} - Question: {} Just answer the question. No explanation is needed. Short answer is: 

LLaMA Generation on Enc-VQA Dataset: 

You are a helpful assistant for answering ency-clopedic questions. If the context does not contain the information required to answer the question, you should answer the question using internal model knowledge. - Context: {} - Question: {} The answer is: 

LLaVA-1.5-7B Generation on InfoSeek Dataset: 

Answer the encyclopedic question about the given image. Don’t mention the visual content of image in your output. Directly output the an-swer of the question according to the context. If you need to answer questions about numbers or time, please output the corresponding numerical format directly. If the context does not contain the information required to answer the question, you should answer the question using internal model knowledge. There is an example: - Context: # Wiki Article: Dolomites ## Section Title: Dolomites The Dolomites, also known as the Dolomite Mountains, Dolomite Alps or Dolomitic Alps, are a mountain range located in northeast-ern Italy. The Dolomites are located in the re-gions of Veneto, Trentino-Alto Adige Südtirol and Friuli Venezia Giulia, covering an area shared be-tween the provinces of Belluno, Vicenza, Verona, Trentino, South Tyrol, Udine and Pordenone. - Question: Which city or region is this mountain located in? Just answer the question. No explanation is needed. Short answer is: Province of Belluno {image} - Context: {} - Question: {} Just answer the question. No explanation is needed. Short answer is: 

LLaVA-1.5-7B Generation on Enc-VQA Dataset: 41146 Answer the encyclopedic question about the given image. Don’t mention the visual content of image in your output. Directly output the answer of the question according to the context. If the context does not contain the information required to answer the question, you should answer the question using internal model knowledge. {image} - Context: {} - Question: {} The answer is: 

A.5 Further Experimental Analysis Fine-grained analysis for InfoSeek: Table 9 presents the accuracy results on the validation set of the InfoSeek dataset across different categories. From the results, we can observe that the model shows relatively better performance in handling time-related and numerical aspects. This may be due to the fact that answers for time or numerical queries are often more precise. In contrast, string-based questions tend to be more open-ended, where even high recall rates may not guarantee accurate responses.             

> Class Total Time Number String
> Unseen Question Score 36.42 40.17 42.01 34.26 Unseen Entity Score 33.81 51.06 34.15 32.63

Table 9: Fine-grained analysis for InfoSeek based on zero-shot LLaMA-3-8B. 41147