Title: UNIBROWSE: A Data-to-Agent Framework for Multimodal BrowseComp

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.10557v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Jul 2026 02:06:23 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
## UNI BROWSE : A Data-to-Agent Framework for Multimodal BrowseComp 

Xiyu Wei 1,2* , Qingwei Zong 1,3* ,Zhuocheng Yu 1,3* , Sujian Li 1,3 † 

> 1

Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, MOE, Peking University  

> 2

School of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University  

> 3

School of Computer Science, Peking University 

{wxylemon, shiinasama}@stu.pku.edu.cn lisujian@pku.edu.cn 

Abstract 

Multimodal BrowseComp tasks require agents to combine perception, tool use, and long-horizon reasoning over dynamic web content, challenging their ability to handle composi-tional structure, open-world uncertainty, and multimodal integration across extended interac-tions. Crucially, real-world multimodal brows-ing involves three distinct information-flow patterns: text-only, image-to-text, and text-to-image, yet existing data construction meth-ods cover only the text-only and image-to-text patterns, leaving text-to-image largely unad-dressed and limiting agent generality and ro-bustness. We introduce UNI BROWSE , a uni-fied data pipeline that for the first time si-multaneously generates training data covering all three patterns, augments curated knowl-edge graphs with live web retrieval for im-proved fidelity, and introduces a novel met-ric of exploration degree to filter low-signal instances for efficient reinforcement learning. Through this pipeline, we produce high-quality cold-start tool-use trajectories and exploration-rich QA pairs, and train a 35B-scale agent via supervised fine-tuning and exploration-aware RL. The resulting U NI BROWSE agent achieves state-of-the-art performance on mul-timodal BrowseComp benchmarks, attaining an average accuracy of 54.4 across five diverse benchmarks—an improvement of 10.5 points over its base model Qwen3.5-35B-A3B—and surpassing serveral closed-source agent work-flows such as GPT-5 (42.9), Gemini-2.5 Pro (44.8), and Gemini-2.5 Flash (41.3). 

1 Introduction 

BrowseComp-style tasks evaluate whether web browsing agents can solve questions whose an-swers are difficult to locate and must be composed from multiple pieces of web evidence (Wei et al., 2025). Unlike standard fact-seeking tasks (Nakano 

> *Equal contribution.
> †Corresponding authors.

et al., 2021), these problems cannot be solved by issuing a single query or extracting a single web-page snippet. Instead, an agent must plan searches, follow partial clues, assess evidence reliability, and combine information across sources to arrive at a uniquely determined answer. Real-world browsing further extends this challenge beyond text: users often provide image clues, ask agents to identify vi-sually grounded entities, or require visual verifica-tion after textual search has narrowed down the tar-get. This gives rise to the more challenging setting of multimodal BrowseComp , where agents must jointly perform textual retrieval, visual grounding, tool use, and long-horizon reasoning over open-web evidence. This emerging setting has there-fore attracted increasing attention from the research community (Jiang et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025b). Despite this growing interest, constructing ef-fective training data for multimodal BrowseComp remains difficult. Early steps toward injecting vi-sual information into the data generation process in-clude WebWatcher (Geng et al., 2025), which relies on curated knowledge graphs to obtain structured relations, as well as Vision - DeepResearch (Zeng et al., 2026) and Skywork R1V4 (Zhang et al., 2025), which employ web random walks to mimic authentic browsing environments. Although these pioneering methods succeed in producing large-scale multimodal training instances, their further application is hindered by a lack of task diversity and insufficient training efficiency, which mani-fests in three key aspects. First, the existing dataset exclusively covers the image-to-text pattern where an initial image clue is resolved into textual ev-idence, but misses the equally important text-to-image pattern where textual browsing precedes visual retrieval. This leaves agents undertrained for scenarios requiring visual-after-textual reason-ing. Second, existing methods rely exclusively on a single construction paradigm, forcing an all-or-nothing trade-off: graph-based methods suffer arXiv:2607.10557v1 [cs.CL] 12 Jul 2026 UniBrowse-35B-A3B Gemini-2.5 Pro GPT-5 Kimi K2.5 Qwen3.5-122B-A10B                            

> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> BC-VL
> 57.8
> 49.9
> 46.1
> 52.8 53.0
> UniBrowse-35B-A3B Gemini-2.5 Pro GPT-5 Kimi K2.5 Qwen3.5-122B-A10B
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> MM-BC
> 28.2
> 14.8
> 18.5
> 32.4
> 25.9
> UniBrowse-35B-A3B Gemini-2.5 Pro GPT-5 Kimi K2.5 Qwen3.5-122B-A10B
> 5
> 15
> 25
> 35
> MMSearch+
> 34.1
> 22.2
> 17.2
> 35.9
> 32.9
> UniBrowse-35B-A3B Gemini-2.5 Pro GPT-5 Kimi K2.5 Qwen3.5-122B-A10B
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> MMSearch
> 75.2
> 69.0
> 63.7 64.9 65.1
> UniBrowse-35B-A3B Gemini-2.5 Pro GPT-5 Kimi K2.5 Qwen3.5-122B-A10B
> 55
> 60
> 65
> 70
> 75
> 80
> FVQA
> 76.7
> 68.3 69.0 67.9
> 71.0
> UniBrowse-35B-A3B Gemini-2.5 Pro GPT-5 Kimi K2.5 Qwen3.5-122B-A10B
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> Avg.
> 54.4
> 44.8 42.9
> 50.8 49.6

Figure 1: Overall performance of U NI BROWSE Agent compared to other models across five benchmarks. 

from restricted web diversity, while random-walk methods expose data generation to massive noise and false evidence. Third, prior works apply learn-ing directly on the generated data without a fil-tering mechanism tailored for the long - horizon, multi - step nature of BrowseComp reasoning. Con-sequently, low - quality trajectories are fed unfiltered into training, wasting computational resources and slowing down model training. To address these limitations, we propose UNI -BROWSE , a unified framework comprising a data construction pipeline and a state-of-the-art multi-modal browsing agent trained from its output as shown in Figure 2. U NI BROWSE expands beyond the previously dominant image-to-text setting by generating multimodal BrowseComp data cover-ing three complementary information-flow patterns (also as pattern): text-only , where the answer is obtained by composing textual evidence; image-to-text , where an image clue must first be resolved before textual browsing can identify or compose the answer; and text-to-image , where textual evi-dence first identifies what should be searched or verified visually. Beyond improving pattern cov-erage, U NI BROWSE also bridges two previously separate data construction paradigms. It starts from structured knowledge-graph skeletons to preserve controllable reasoning paths, while augmenting them with live web retrieval to introduce realistic, Internet-grounded evidence and reduce the gap be-tween synthetic construction and authentic brows-ing. To further improve training efficiency, U NI -BROWSE incorporates exploration-aware data se-lection into the pipeline. Specifically, we propose the metric of exploration degree that measures the diversity of successful reasoning trajectories and filters out low-exploration instances with limited learning signals, enabling reinforcement learning to focus on problems that better exercise long-horizon, multi-step browsing behavior. From this pipeline, we generate 8K cold-start tool-use trajectories and 10K QA pairs, and train a 35B-scale U NI BROWSE agent via supervised fine-tuning and exploration-aware RL. The result-ing agent achieves state-of-the-art performance on multimodal BrowseComp benchmarks as shown in Figure 1, validating that our data-to-agent frame-work effectively translates pattern coverage, web-enhanced grounding, and exploration-driven selec-tion into strong browsing capabilities. Our contributions can be summarized as follows: • We propose UNI BROWSE , a unified data con-struction pipeline that for the first time simulta-neously generates multimodal BrowseComp data covering text-only, image-to-text, and text-to-image information-flow patterns, and augments knowledge-graph grounding with live web re-trieval for improved real-world fidelity. • We introduce an exploration degree metric and an exploration-aware data filtering strategy tai-lored to the long-horizon nature of BrowseComp tasks, which removes low-exploration instances and significantly improves reinforcement learn-ing efficiency. • We train a 35B-scale UNI BROWSE agent from 8K cold-start tool-use trajectories and 10K QA pairs produced by our pipeline. The agent achieves state-of-the-art performance on multi-modal BrowseComp benchmarks, outperforming prior open-source baselines. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Web Text-Browsing Agents 

Web browsing agents have evolved from browser -assisted QA (Nakano et al., 2021) and interactive task completion (Yao et al., 2022a; Deng et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023) to complex Reverse Image Search                   

> Query ：image of the question
> Result ：
> Philippine Collegian
> The image matches the student
> publication Philippine Collegian.
> Image to Text
> Text Search
> Query ：Philippine Collegian
> campus
> Result ：
> UP Diliman
> Evidence indicates Philippine
> Collegian is associated with the UP
> Diliman campus.
> Text Only
> Image Search
> Query ：official seal of UP
> Result ：
> Official seal of UP
> The official seal is verified
> visually and its central animal
> is an eagle.
> Text to Image
> Multimodal Question
> Identify the campus
> associated with this
> publication, then trace it
> to its parent university
> system. What animal
> appears on that university
> system‘s official seal?
> Final Answer

EAGLE 

> ¸
> 𝑠

𝐺 𝑇 (𝑠 )

𝐺 KG  

> Subgraph Extraction
> ¸

𝐺 𝑇 (𝑠 )

> ¸

𝒞 𝑇 (𝑠 )

> 𝒜 (𝑣 )
> 𝑠
> ···
> ···
> ···
> ···
> ¸
> ¸
> Cold -start tool -use
> trajectories (SFT)
> Exploration -rich
> QA pairs (RL)

8K 

10K         

> Textual Skeleton Web Info Expansion Multimodal Pattern Expansion Exploration -Driven
> Selection
> Curated Outputs
> (1) Text -Only
> (2) Image -to -Text
> (3) Text -to -Image
> Image Node
> Image Node
> Visual
> Attribute
> Multiple rollouts
> for each question
> Exploration degree distribution
> across questions
> Filter
> Keep Top 30%

(a) 

(b) 

Data Construction Pipeline 

UniBrowse Agent Browsing Figure 2: Overview of the U NI BROWSE framework. (a) The data construction pipeline starts from textual knowledge-graph skeletons, augments them with live web evidence, expands them into text-only, image-to-text, and text-to-image patterns, and applies exploration-aware selection to RL QA pairs. (b) The U NI BROWSE multimodal browsing trajectory shows how the agent resolves an image clue, follows textual web evidence, and verifies the final visual attribute through image search. 

information seeking over the open web. BrowseC-omp (Wei et al., 2025) further raises the difficulty: answers must be composed from multiple, non -obvious web sources, requiring agents to navi-gate among clues and combine partial evidence. To equip agents with such compositional reasoning, recent text - only BrowseComp pipelines—Tongyi Deepresearch (Team et al., 2025), WebSailor (Li et al., 2025a), WebShaper (Tao et al., 2025b), and OpenSeeker (Du et al., 2026)—have demonstrated that large -scale synthetic data can significantly improve multi - step retrieval. Despite this progress, these pipelines remain restricted to textual evi-dence, while real - world browsing frequently mixes visual and textual clues; constructing multimodal BrowseComp training data therefore remains an open challenge. 

2.2 Multimodal Browsing Agents 

Despite the maturity of text -only BrowseComp pipelines, extending them to multimodal settings requires agents to jointly reason over images and text in varying orders. Recent benchmarks such as MMSearch (Jiang et al., 2024), MM-Search+ (Tao et al., 2025a), and FVQA (Wu et al., 2025) evaluate multimodal search and fact -based visual QA, while several training pipelines have been proposed: WebWatcher (Geng et al., 2025) constructs image -to - text data from knowl-edge graphs and introduces BrowseComp - VL; Vision -DeepResearch (Zeng et al., 2026) and Skywork - R1V4 (Zhang et al., 2025) use web ran-dom walks to generate multimodal trajectories. However, the data pipelines of these works cover only the image - to - text pattern, lacking the text - to - image pattern where textual reasoning iden-tifies a target and visual retrieval provides the fi-nal evidence. This omission hurts performance on benchmarks covering all three patterns (i.e., MM-BrowseComp (Li et al., 2025b) 1). Furthermore, while reinforcement learning (RL) can improve long-horizon, multi-turn interaction, prior efforts apply RL directly to unfiltered synthetic data, wast-ing computation on low-signal rollouts and limit-ing performance gains per training step. Together, these gaps motivate the need for training data that covers all information-flow patterns, as well as se-lection strategies that maximize RL efficiency. 

> 1

MM-BrowseComp is the sole manually curated dataset covering all three patterns and even leading proprietary work-flows fail to reach a 50% score on it 3 Data Construction Pipeline 

As shown in Figure 2 (a), we describe the data construction pipeline of U NI BROWSE . Given a textual knowledge graph and live web access, the pipeline produces multimodal BrowseComp tasks with three properties critical for training capable agents: (i) full coverage of text-only, image-to-text, and text-to-image information-flow patterns, (ii) web-augmented evidence grounding that bridges structured graph knowledge and open - web diver-sity, and (iii) exploration -aware instance selection that prioritizes problems with rich learning signals for reinforcement learning. 

3.1 Textual KG with Web Expansion 

The pipeline begins with a textual knowledge graph 

GKG , which provides structured relations among entities and attributes. To generate a question, for each seed entity s we construct a connected tex-tual evidence subgraph GT (s) by selecting a set of related anchors and expanding the local neigh-borhood through multi -hop graph traversal. This subgraph contains a network of interrelated enti-ties, constraints, and factual edges, and it defines the full evidential context that will later ground the question. The subgraph GT (s) is organized into layers that reflect the logical dependencies among evi-dence nodes. The initial layer L0 consists of the seed clues (entities or constraints that are known at the start of the problem). Each subsequent layer 

Lk (k ≥ 1) consists of evidence nodes that can be determined by aggregating information from preceding layers L0, . . . , Lk−1. The final layer 

LL contains only the target answer a. This lay-ered structure ensures that arriving at the answer requires progressively resolving intermediate evi-dence from the available context. The total number of intermediate layers controls reasoning depth, and the graph relations guarantee that all required evidential links are present in GT (s).

Web -augmented attribute expansion. Purely graph -grounded skeletons may lack the descriptive richness needed for realistic BrowseComp tasks. We therefore enrich each entity node v ∈ GT (s)

with attributes extracted from live web retrieval. For each v, we issue a web search, collect raw text snippets, and use an LLM to extract candidate attribute statements, retaining only those indepen-dently corroborated across multiple search results. This yields a verified attribute set A(v), which is at-tached to v so that the node carries both its original graph relations and reliable, web - sourced descrip-tors. Further implementation details, including the extraction prompt, normalization procedure, and support thresholds, are provided in the Appendix C. The combined evidence context for s becomes 

CT (s) =  GT (s), {A (v)}v∈GT (s)

, (1) which grounds the question in curated graph rela-tions and in verified web attributes. 

3.2 Unified Multimodal Pattern Expansion 

The text - only skeleton produces questions that depend solely on textual evidence composition. Real - world multimodal browsing, however, also re-quires two additional patterns: image - to - text where a visual clue initiates the search, and text -to -image where textual reasoning identifies a target whose visual properties supply the final evidence. Rather than constructing these patterns independently, UNI BROWSE evaluates each generated evidence subgraph GT (s) for its ability to support multi-ple information-flow patterns, then materializes the feasible ones by attaching image nodes to the ap-propriate layers. 

Image-to-text. Following WebWatcher (Geng et al., 2025), we assess whether the entities in the initial layer L0 have retrievable visual representa-tions. For each candidate entity in L0, we query image sources and retain the first valid image; en-tities that pass this check form the image node set 

Ui2t (L0).

Text-to-image. The text - to - image pattern im-poses stricter requirements on the answer entity 

a in the final layer LL. The entity must (i) be 

clearly identifiable in a retrieved image, so that the agent can reliably recognize it after textual rea-soning narrows the candidate set, and (ii) possess a distinct, visually verifiable attribute such as a specific color, shape, logo, or architectural feature, that is not stated in the textual evidence. A mere depiction of the target entity is insufficient: the tex-tual steps already identify which entity to look for, so the image must contribute evidence that is not recoverable from text alone. To determine whether a subgraph can support this pattern, we apply a filtering and annotation stage over the answer entity a. We retrieve its candidate images and use a multimodal judge to verify entity identifiability, extract a unique visual attribute absent from the textual evidence, and con-firm that removing the image node renders the ques-tion unanswerable. Entities whose images pass all three checks form the set Ut2i (a). Full implementa-tion details of the retrieval, judging, and annotation procedure are provided in the Appendix B. 

Pattern materialization. From evidence sub-graphs GT (s), we instantiate the following pat-terns: • Text-only : the question is generated directly from the layered evidence structure of GT (s).• Image-to-text : if Ui2t (L0)̸ = ∅, an image node is linked to the corresponding entity in the ini-tial layer L0, serving as the entry point of the question. • Text-to-image : if Ut2i (a)̸ = ∅, an image node carrying the verified visual attribute is appended to the answer entity a in the final layer LL, pro-viding the final visual evidence for the question. These patterns are not mutually exclusive: all three information-flow patterns can be freely combined within a single question. For instance, a subgraph that supports both image - to - text and text -to -image conditions can produce a hybrid question carrying both an entry image at L0 and a verification im-age at LL (see Figure 3 for an illustration), while text -only evidence composition remains the back-bone that connects them. For multimodal patterns, the evidence context is augmented with the same web - retrieved attributes as in the text - only case, forming the multimodal context CM (s).

Question generation. We convert each evidence subgraph (with its attached image nodes, if any) into a natural language question using an VLM generator Gen . For text-only instances, Gen 

takes GT (s) and CT (s) as input and produces 

(qT , a ∗); for multimodal instances, it receives the image-expanded subgraph and CM (s), producing 

(qM , a ∗).

3.3 Data Filtering and Exploration-Driven Selection 

Each generated sample—whether text-only, image-to-text, or text-to-image—carries the construction-time key evidence steps derived from its layered subgraph, denoted by π, and a pattern-specific con-text Cp(s) (where Cp(s) = CT (s) for text-only in-stances and Cp(s) = CM (s) for multimodal ones). Before being used for training, every sample first passes a set of lightweight static validations. We then introduce an exploration degree metric that is applied only to the reinforcement learning stage, where training cost is highest. 

Basic quality control. We enforce three fast checks: 1. Sufficiency – the answer a∗ must be fully sup-ported by Cp(s).2. Modality necessity – for image-involving pat-terns, removing the image node must render the question unanswerable, guaranteeing that the visual clue is non-redundant. 3. Uniqueness – no alternative answer may satisfy all constraints in the evidence context. Samples that fail any check are discarded. 

Exploration degree. Static validation ensures well-formedness but not whether a problem ex-poses a rich search space for policy learning. In-formative RL instances should require meaning-ful decisions—query reformulation, source selec-tion, evidence verification, modality switching— rather than admit only a single narrow solution path. When all successful rollouts follow essentially the same route, they provide little behavioral contrast for the policy to learn from. We capture this di-versity through the exploration degree E(q). For a validated question q with its key evidence steps 

π, we sample B rollout trajectories using a base agent and let Y+(q) be the subset that reaches the correct answer. If |Y +(q)| ≤ 1, we set E(q) = 0 .Otherwise, for each successful trajectory τb we measure its exploration length relative to the fixed key-evidence-step set, i.e., the number of brows-ing actions (search / linksummary calls) it takes, normalized by |π|:

ℓ(τb, π ) = # browsing steps in τb

|π| , (2) and take the variance of this normalized length across successful rollouts: 

E(q) = Var τb∈Y +(q)

ℓ(τb, π ). (3) Since |π| is fixed per question, ℓ isolates how much the browsing effort of successful routes varies. A high E(q) indicates that correct answers are reached through browsing routes of substantially different lengths—some via a compact direct path, others via reformulation-heavy or backtracking exploration—exposing the policy to a broader but grounded exploration space and providing richer contrastive signals for RL. A low E(q) signals that all successful routes are essentially uniform in length, offering limited behavioral contrast. We use E(q) exclusively for data selection, not as an auxiliary reward; this metric guides instance fil-tering in subsequent RL training. We provide a further detailed explanation and a worked example in Appendix D. 

4 Training U NI BROWSE Agent 

We convert each QA pair from Section 3 into a tool - augmented trajectory and train the agent in two stages: supervised fine - tuning (SFT) estab-lishes a stable action grammar, while reinforcement learning (RL) on exploration - rich instances opti-mizes multi - step browsing policies, resulting the UNI BROWSE Agent as shown in Figure 2 (b). 

4.1 Tool Environment and Trajectory Format 

The agent interacts with two tools that mirror the evidence - gathering patterns defined in our data pipeline. • SEARCH (backed by SerpAPI) supports three modes: text_only for standard web retrieval, 

image_to_text for resolving an image clue into textual evidence, and text_to_image for locat-ing visual evidence from a textual description. • LINK SUMMARY takes a URL and a query; an auxiliary Qwen3 - 30B -A3B model (Yang et al., 2025) reads the page and returns a query -conditioned summary, keeping raw HTML outside the main agent’s context. Browsing is formulated as a ReAct -style sequen-tial decision process (Yao et al., 2022b). At step t,the agent observes state St = ( q, p, h t) (question, pattern, serialized history) and produces an action 

zt ∼ πθ(·| St). Actions can be reasoning steps, tool calls, or a final answer. Tool observations ot are appended to the history, and a trajectory terminates when the agent emits an answer segment. All actions and observations follow a fixed seri-alization protocol, summarized in Table 1. 

4.2 Training Overview 

We train U NI BROWSE in two stages, using the data produced by the pipeline of Section 3. 

Cold-start SFT. We use questions produced by the pipeline to produce approximately 8,000 tool - use trajectories, filtered only by basic quality              

> Segment Serialized template
> Reasoning <think> rt</think>
> Tool call <tool_call> ct</tool_call>
> Tool return <tool_response> ot</tool_response>
> Final answer <answer> ˆa</answer>
> Table 1: Typed serialization format for U NI BROWSE
> tool-augmented trajectories.

checks; this instills a stable action grammar and a pattern-aware prior. 

Exploration - aware RL. To improve robustness, we further optimize the SFT model with reinforce-ment learning. For this expensive stage, we activate exploration - aware selection (Section 3.3), retaining the top -k quantile instances by exploration degree 

E(q) to obtain around 10,000 exploration - rich prob-lems. The RL reward combines the correctness of the answers with the correctness of the format, and we optimize using Group Relative Policy Optimiza-tion (GRPO) (Shao et al., 2024). The set of key evidence steps π recorded during data construction is used only for data selection and analysis, not in the reward itself. Full details of teacher trajectory construction, loss functions, reward design, and hyperparameters are provided in the Appendix B. 

5 Experiments 

In this section, we evaluate U NI BROWSE on mul-timodal browsing tasks. We first describe the ex-perimental setup, including implementation details, benchmarks, baselines, and metrics. We then com-pare U NI BROWSE with a broad set of baselines. Finally, we conduct ablation studies to validate our key design choices. 

5.1 Experimental Setup Implementation Details We implement U NI -BROWSE training on 64 NVIDIA H20 GPUs us-ing veRL (Wu, 2025) and initialize the agent from Qwen3.5-35B-A3B (Team, 2026). The training data is produced by the U NI BROWSE construc-tion and validation pipeline described in Section 3; unless otherwise specified, we balance the three information-flow patterns (text-only, image-to-text, and text-to-image) with an equal 1:1:1 proportion. The SFT and RL configurations follow the setup described in Section 4.2, with full training details provided in Appendix ?? .Model BC-VL MM-BC MMSearch+ MMSearch FVQA Avg. Direct Answer MLLMs                                                                                                                                                                                           

> GPT-5 47.2 7.9 19.1 33.3 57.3 33.0 Gemini-2.5 Pro 43.1 7.9 14.5 39.8 60.7 33.2 Gemini-2.5 Flash 37.1 4.8 8.1 30.4 47.7 25.6 Gemini-3.1 Pro 42.8 16.7 21.6 55.6 56.2 38.6
> Claude-4-Sonnet 29.3 –4.0 18.7 35.3 –Claude-3.7-Sonnet 32.3 –4.0 21.1 36.7 –Doubao Seed 2.0 Pro 47.9 9.72 14.9 45.6 62.2 36.1 Kimi K2.5 (Team et al., 2026) 40.9 9.72 11.7 58.5 60.3 36.2 Qwen3-VL-30B-A3B-Thinking (Bai et al., 2025) 34.6 5.2 4.5 19.3 32.7 19.3 Qwen3.5-35B-A3B (Team, 2026) 31.1 8.30 0.27 28.7 39.6 21.6 Qwen3.5-122B-A10B (Team, 2026) 35.4 9.80 5.11 38.9 45.2 26.9
> Agent Workflow MLLMs
> GPT-5 46.1 18.5 17.2 63.7 69.0 42.9 Gemini-2.5 Pro 49.9 14.8 22.2 69.0 68.3 44.8 Gemini-2.5 Flash 44.6 10.2 19.9 64.0 68.0 41.3 Gemini-3.1 Pro 64.7 46.3 49.7 77.0 78.3 63.2
> Claude-4-Sonnet 48.6 –23.1 67.2 69.0 –Claude-3.7-Sonnet 50.4 –17.2 63.7 67.3 –Doubao Seed 2.0 Pro 67.3 38.4 49.1 80.1 77.5 62.5 Kimi K2.5 (Team et al., 2026) 52.8 32.4 35.9 64.9 67.9 50.8 Qwen3-VL-30B-A3B-Thinking (Bai et al., 2025) 44.1 6.00 13.6 53.2 63.0 36.0 Qwen3.5-35B-A3B (Team, 2026) 50.4 17.1 24.4 62.6 65.2 43.9 Qwen3.5-122B-A10B (Team, 2026) 53.0 25.9 32.9 65.1 71.0 49.6
> Multimodal DeepResearch MLLM
> MMSearch-R1-7B –––53.8 58.4 –WebWatcher-7B 20.3 ––49.1 ––WebWatcher-32B 26.7 10.7 13.6 55.3 52.1 31.7
> Skywork-R1V4-30B-A3B (Zhang et al., 2025) 38.4 ––66.1 67.2 –Vision-DeepResearch-8B 42.6 –20.4 69.6 64.7 –Vision-DeepResearch-30B-A3B 53.7 –28.5 69.6 74.2 –
> UniBrowse Agent (Ours)
> Qwen3.5-35B-A3B (Team, 2026) 50.4 17.1 24.4 62.6 65.2 43.9 UniBrowse-35B-A3B SFT 54.4 21.8 32.6 70.8 73.4 50.6 UniBrowse-35B-A3B SFT+RL 57.8 28.2 34.1 75.2 76.7 54.4

Table 2: Main results on multimodal browsing reasoning benchmarks. We report accuracy on each benchmark; Avg. is shown only when all five benchmark results are available. The best result in each block is highlighted in bold .

Benchmarks We evaluate on five benchmarks. BrowseComp-VL (BC-VL) is introduced by Web-Watcher (Geng et al., 2025). MM-BrowseComp (MM-BC) is a multimodal BrowseComp bench-mark (Li et al., 2025b) and, crucially, the only benchmark that evaluates all three information-flow patterns (text-only, image-to-text, and text-to-image), making it the most challenging in our suite. For MM-BC, we use the subset that does not require video reasoning or map-specific tools, so that all models are compared under the same image-and-web browsing tool setting. MMSearch+ is eval-uated on its single-image subset (Tao et al., 2025a), while MMSearch follows the original multimodal search benchmark (Jiang et al., 2024). FVQA is the fact-based visual question answering benchmark introduced in MMSearch-R1 (Wu et al., 2025). 

Baselines and Metrics We compare UNI -BROWSE with three groups of baselines. Direct-answer MLLMs answer the question without an ex-plicit browsing workflow, measuring how much the base model can solve from its parametric and visual reasoning ability alone. Agent-workflow MLLMs use tool-augmented browsing trajectories, provid-ing a stronger comparison for search-and-reasoning settings. DeepResearch MLLMs are recent open-source systems specialized for search-intensive rea-soning. For our own model family, we report the Qwen3.5-35B-A3B base model, the U NI BROWSE 

SFT model, and the U NI BROWSE SFT+RL model to isolate the effect of cold-start trajectory learning and reinforcement learning. We report LLM-as-a-judge accuracy on each benchmark. 5.2 Main Results 

Table 2 compares proprietary and open-source systems under three model settings. Direct an-swering without tool use proves largely insuffi-cient: among models with complete results, the best direct-answer average is only 38.6% (Gemini-3.1 Pro), confirming that internal knowledge alone cannot reliably solve these multimodal BrowseC-omp tasks. Equipping models with browsing tools yields dramatic improvements across the board. The strongest proprietary agent workflow, Gemini-3.1 Pro, reaches an average of 63.2%. This under-scores that tool-augmented interaction is essential for compositional multimodal retrieval. Our U NI BROWSE agent, trained with the pro-posed data pipeline, establishes a new state of the art among open-source models. Starting from the Qwen3.5-35B-A3B baseline (43.9% average), supervised fine-tuning on our cold-start trajecto-ries lifts the average to 50.6%, already surpass-ing all prior open-source multimodal browsing agents with reported averages (e.g., WebWatcher-32B at 31.7%). Adding exploration-aware rein-forcement learning further boosts performance to 54.4% average, a gain of 10.5 percentage points over the base model, achieving the best results on every benchmark in the open-source category: 57.8 on BrowseComp-VL, 28.2 on MM-BrowseComp, 34.1 on MMSearch+, 75.2 on MMSearch, and 76.7 on FVQA. While a gap remains to the strongest proprietary workflow (63.2%), U NI BROWSE nar-rows it by more than half. These results demon-strate that a unified data generation strategy cov-ering diverse information-flow patterns, combined with exploration-aware data selection, can produce highly capable multimodal browsing agents from open-source foundations. Additionally, we provide a case study section in the Appendix A. 

5.3 Ablation Study Data ablation. Table 3 summarizes a data abla-tion on BC-VL and MM-BC. The variants use the same training recipe but differ in which patterns are included in the training data. Training only on text-only data drops below the base model, from 33.8 to 30.4 Avg., showing that post-training without multimodal tool-use patterns can hurt browsing performance. Adding image-to-text data recovers much of this loss and im-proves BC-VL from 46.6 to 54.3, confirming the value of image-grounded search supervision. How-                                         

> Training data BC-VL MM-BC Avg.
> Base model 50.4 17.1 33.8 Text-only 46.6 14.1 30.4 Text-only + image-to-text 54.3 18.5 36.4
> All three patterns 57.8 28.2 43.0
> Table 3: Data ablation on BrowseComp-VL (BC-VL) and MM-BrowseComp (MM-BC). Avg. is the mean of the two benchmark scores. “All three patterns” includes text-only, image-to-text, and text-to-image data.
> RL selection pool BC-VL MM-BC Avg.
> Top 100% by E(q)53.9 24.7 39.3 Top 70% by E(q)55.1 23.3 39.2 Top 50% by E(q)56.5 26.7 41.6
> Top 30% by E(q)57.8 28.2 43.0
> Top 10% by E(q)52.1 20.3 36.2
> Table 4: Exploration-selection ablation. Each row uses 10K RL questions sampled from the retained pool ranked by E(q).

ever, MM-BC remains at the base level. This lim-ited gain on MM-BC is consistent with its mixed information-flow composition, where image-to-text supervision alone does not cover text-to-image cases. The full mixture, which further adds text-to-image data, improves MM-BC to 28.2 and reaches 43.0 Avg., indicating that broad pattern coverage is important for multimodal BrowseComp training. 

Exploration-selection ablation. Table 4 studies the quantile threshold used to select RL questions by exploration degree. All variants use the same number of RL questions and differ only in the re-tained candidate pool before sampling. Keeping all candidates or using a loose thresh-old yields limited gains, suggesting that many low-contrast questions provide weak RL signal. Perfor-mance generally improves when overly broad pools are narrowed toward higher-exploration questions, peaking at the top-30% threshold. The top-10% setting drops, suggesting that overly strict filtering reduces data diversity. We therefore use the top 30% threshold in the final U NI BROWSE agent. 

6 Conclusion 

We presented U NI BROWSE , a data-to-agent frame-work for multimodal BrowseComp. U NI BROWSE 

constructs training data across the full set of information-flow patterns: text-only, image-to-text, and text-to-image. It further grounds graph-structured reasoning paths with live web evidence, combining the controllability of knowledge-graph-based construction with the diversity and realism of open-web retrieval. To make post-training more efficient, U NI BROWSE introduces exploration de-gree and uses it for exploration-aware RL data se-lection, focusing expensive rollout-based optimiza-tion on questions that expose richer browsing be-haviors. From the resulting cold-start tool-use tra-jectories and exploration-rich QA pairs, we train a 35B-A3B multimodal browsing agent that achieves strong open-source performance across five multi-modal browsing benchmarks. These results show that controllable multimodal data construction and exploration-aware post-training are both important for building effective browsing agents. 

Limitations 

Although U NI BROWSE substantially narrows the gap between open-source agents and the strongest proprietary workflow, a performance gap still re-mains, suggesting that stronger foundation models, larger-scale post-training, and more capable tool infrastructures may further improve multimodal browsing agents. Our experiments are limited to public-web, image-and-text browsing tasks that can be handled with search and link summariza-tion tools; richer environments such as interac-tive webpages, video- or map-centric browsing, multilingual search, and domain-specific evidence sources remain beyond the capabilities of the cur-rent agent. On the reinforcement learning side, while our exploration-aware selection provides an effective principle for filtering training data, we do not address the long-tail inefficiencies inherent in agentic rollout trajectories, which remain a major bottleneck for RL training efficiency. Similarly, our exploration-aware selection relies on a fixed rollout budget to estimate the exploration degree; the design of more sample-efficient selection strate-gies that adapt to evolving web content and model capabilities also remains an open challenge. 

Ethics Statement 

This work fully complies with the ACL Ethics Pol-icy. We declare that there are no ethical issues in this paper, to the best of our knowledge. 

References 

Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen, Xionghui Chen, Zesen Cheng, Lianghao Deng, Wei Ding, Chang Gao, Chunjiang Ge, et al. 2025. Qwen3-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21631 .Xiang Deng, Yu Gu, Boyuan Zheng, Shijie Chen, Sam Stevens, Boshi Wang, Huan Sun, and Yu Su. 2023. Mind2web: Towards a generalist agent for the web. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,36:28091–28114. Yuwen Du, Rui Ye, Shuo Tang, Xinyu Zhu, Yi-jun Lu, Yuzhu Cai, and Siheng Chen. 2026. Openseeker: Democratizing frontier search agents by fully open-sourcing training data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.15594 .Xinyu Geng, Peng Xia, Zhen Zhang, Xinyu Wang, Qi-uchen Wang, Ruixue Ding, Chenxi Wang, Jialong Wu, Yida Zhao, Kuan Li, et al. 2025. Webwatcher: Breaking new frontier of vision-language deep re-search agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.05748 .Dongzhi Jiang, Renrui Zhang, Ziyu Guo, Yanmin Wu, Jiayi Lei, Pengshuo Qiu, Pan Lu, Zehui Chen, Chaoyou Fu, Guanglu Song, et al. 2024. Mm-search: Benchmarking the potential of large mod-els as multi-modal search engines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12959 .Kuan Li, Zhongwang Zhang, Huifeng Yin, Liwen Zhang, Litu Ou, Jialong Wu, Wenbiao Yin, Baix-uan Li, Zhengwei Tao, Xinyu Wang, et al. 2025a. Websailor: Navigating super-human reasoning for web agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.02592 .Shilong Li, Xingyuan Bu, Wenjie Wang, Jiaheng Liu, Jun Dong, Haoyang He, Hao Lu, Haozhe Zhang, Chenchen Jing, Zhen Li, et al. 2025b. Mm-browsecomp: A comprehensive benchmark for multimodal browsing agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.13186 .Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. 2021. Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332 .Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. 2024. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 .Xijia Tao, Yihua Teng, Xinxing Su, Xinyu Fu, Jihao Wu, Chaofan Tao, Ziru Liu, Haoli Bai, Rui Liu, and Ling-peng Kong. 2025a. Mmsearch-plus: Benchmarking provenance-aware search for multimodal browsing agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.21475 .Zhengwei Tao, Jialong Wu, Wenbiao Yin, Junkai Zhang, Baixuan Li, Haiyang Shen, Kuan Li, Li-wen Zhang, Xinyu Wang, Yong Jiang, et al. 2025b. Webshaper: Agentically data synthesiz-ing via information-seeking formalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.15061 .Kimi Team, Tongtong Bai, Yifan Bai, Yiping Bao, SH Cai, Yuan Cao, Y Charles, HS Che, Cheng Chen, Guanduo Chen, et al. 2026. Kimi k2.5: Visual agen-tic intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02276 .Qwen Team. 2026. Qwen3.5: Accelerating productivity with native multimodal agents. Tongyi DeepResearch Team, Baixuan Li, Bo Zhang, Dingchu Zhang, Fei Huang, Guangyu Li, Guoxin Chen, Huifeng Yin, Jialong Wu, Jingren Zhou, et al. 2025. Tongyi deepresearch technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.24701 .Jason Wei, Zhiqing Sun, Spencer Papay, Scott McK-inney, Jeffrey Han, Isa Fulford, Hyung Won Chung, Alex Tachard Passos, William Fedus, and Amelia Glaese. 2025. Browsecomp: A simple yet challeng-ing benchmark for browsing agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.12516 .Chuan Wu. 2025. Hybridflow: A flexible and effi-cient rlhf framework. EuroSys 2025 (30/03/2025-03/04/2025, Rotterdam) .Jinming Wu, Zihao Deng, Wei Li, Yiding Liu, Bo You, Bo Li, Zejun Ma, and Ziwei Liu. 2025. Mmsearch-r1: Incentivizing lmms to search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.20670 .An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. 2025. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 .Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2022a. Webshop: Towards scalable real-world web interaction with grounded language agents. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:20744–20757. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2022b. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 .Yu Zeng, Wenxuan Huang, Zhen Fang, Shuang Chen, Yufan Shen, Yishuo Cai, Xiaoman Wang, Zhenfei Yin, Lin Chen, Zehui Chen, et al. 2026. Vision-deepresearch benchmark: Rethinking visual and tex-tual search for multimodal large language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02185 .Yifan Zhang, Liang Hu, Haofeng Sun, Peiyu Wang, Yichen Wei, Shukang Yin, Jiangbo Pei, Wei Shen, Peng Xia, Yi Peng, et al. 2025. Skywork-r1v4: To-ward agentic multimodal intelligence through inter-leaved thinking with images and deepresearch. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.02395 .Shuyan Zhou, Frank F Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng, Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, et al. 2023. We-barena: A realistic web environment for building au-tonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13854 .A Case Study 

Figure 3 shows a concrete text-to-image pattern question produced by U NI BROWSE data pipeline. In this example, the U NI BROWSE agent first grounds the image clue, uses textual search and link summarization to resolve the target entity, and finally performs text-to-image search to verify the visual attribute required by the answer. 

B Multimodal Pattern Expansion Details 

This appendix supplements Section 3.2 with im-plementation details of the image retrieval, multi-modal judging, and annotation steps for construct-ing Ui2t (L0) and Ut2i (a).

Image-to-text image set. For the image-to-text pattern, we follow the procedure of Web-Watcher (Geng et al., 2025). Given the entities in the initial layer L0, we query Google Images with each entity name and its graph-provided aliases, retrieve the top-10 results, and retain the first im-age that is not a generic icon or logo unrelated to the entity. The retained image becomes the sole candidate in Ui2t (L0).

Text-to-image candidate retrieval. For each an-swer entity a in the final layer LL, we construct a set of search queries by combining the entity name with contextual keywords from the layered subgraph (e.g., attributes of entities in intermediate layers L1, . . . , LL−1). We issue these queries to Google Images and collect up to 20 candidate im-ages per query, deduplicating near-duplicates via perceptual hashing. All unique images form the initial candidate pool for a.

Multimodal judge. We use an MLLM (the same judge used for quality control in Section 3.3) to filter and annotate text-to-image candidates. The judge receives the question context (the layered evidence structure of the subgraph together with the final answer a) together with a candidate image. It is asked to answer three structured questions: 1. Entity identifiability: Is the target entity a

clearly depicted and distinguishable in the im-age? (yes/no) 2. Visual attribute extraction: What visually ver-ifiable attribute of the entity can be observed in the image that is not already stated in the layered textual evidence? If none, answer “None”. 3. Modality necessity: If the image were removed, would the question still be answerable from text alone? (yes/no) A candidate image is retained only if the judge an-swers “yes” to question 1, provides a non-empty, specific attribute for question 2, and answers “no” to question 3. The extracted attribute is then nor-malized to a short phrase (e.g., “red roof”, “golden statue”, “three arches”). 

Final image set. For each answer entity a, we keep the first three images that pass the judge filter to form Ut2i (a). If fewer than three images pass, we discard the entity from text-to-image expansion (it will only appear in text-only and, if applicable, image-to-text patterns). All retained images are stored together with their verified visual attribute for use in the pattern expansion step. 

B.1 Cold-Start Supervised Fine-Tuning 

To obtain reliable teacher demonstrations, we prompt an open - source multimodal teacher model (Kimi K2.5 (Team et al., 2026)) with each vali-dated task x = ( q, Cp(s), a ∗, p ) and collect rollouts that reach the correct answer while respecting the tool protocol and pattern constraints. The resulting teacher trajectory τ ⋆ = ( z1, o 1, . . . , z T , ˆa), with 

ˆa = a∗, provides a step - by - step demonstration of correct tool use and evidence composition. The cold -start SFT set is Dcs = {(xi, τ ⋆i )}Ncs 

> i=1

,and we minimize the standard next -token predic-tion loss: 

Lcs (θ) = − X 

> (x,τ ⋆)∈D cs

X 

> zt∈τ⋆

log πθ(zt | St). (4) We train for 3 epochs and use the final checkpoint. This stage establishes a stable action grammar and a pattern - aware tool - use prior, but it does not directly penalize inefficient exploration or reward recovery from mistakes. 

B.2 Reinforcement Learning with Exploration-Aware Data Selection 

Cold - start SFT gives the model a basic browsing protocol, but robust deployment requires the ability to choose effective strategies and avoid degener-ate loops. We therefore further optimize the pol-icy through reinforcement learning. Crucially, RL is applied only to a subset of validated QA pairs selected via the exploration degree introduced in Section 3.3. For cold-start supervised fine-tuning, we do 

not apply exploration-based filtering; we keep all teacher-generated trajectories that pass basic qual-ity control to establish a stable action grammar and pattern - aware prior. For reinforcement learning, where training resource consumption is greatest, we activate exploration-aware selection: from the pool of validated QA pairs, we retain only those instances whose exploration degree E(q) exceeds a top -k quantile threshold. This yields a compact set of exploration-rich problems that maximize policy improvement per training step and prevent wasted computation on low-signal trajectories. Each re-tained instance carries its set of key evidence steps 

π, recorded during construction from the layered evidence subgraph. Together with the QA pair, these form the RL training set DRL , but π is used only for data selection and analysis; the RL reward itself does not use π directly. We train the policy for 150 steps using GRPO. 

Reward Design. We use a composite reward combining answer correctness and format adher-ence: 

R(x, τ ) = λans Rans (x, τ ) + λfmt Rfmt (τ ). (5) 

Rans employs an LLM - as - a- judge to verify seman-tic equivalence between the extracted answer and 

a∗. Rfmt checks that the trajectory strictly follows the serialization protocol (correct tag usage, valid tool call structure, and exactly one final answer segment). This design preserves answer accuracy while discouraging format drift and redundant tool chains. 

Policy Optimization. We adopt Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) (Shao et al., 2024). For each task x ∈ D RL , the current policy πθ sam-ples K trajectories, and the advantage is computed from the reward distribution within the group. The objective is 

max  

> θ

Ex∼D RL , τ ∼πθ (·| x) [R(x, τ )] , (6) optimized via the standard GRPO update. After RL training, the U NI BROWSE agent achieves robust multimodal browsing capabilities with improved trajectory efficiency and answer accuracy. 

Reward Design. We use a composite reward combining answer correctness and format adher-ence: 

R(x, τ ) = λans Rans (x, τ ) + λfmt Rfmt (τ ). (7) 

Rans employs an LLM - as -a - judge to verify seman-tic equivalence between the extracted answer and 

a∗. Rfmt checks that the trajectory strictly follows the serialization protocol (correct tag usage, valid tool call structure, and exactly one final answer segment). This design preserves answer accuracy while discouraging format drift and redundant tool chains. 

Policy Optimization. We adopt Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) (Shao et al., 2024). For each task x ∈ D RL , the current policy πθ sam-ples K trajectories, and the advantage is computed from the reward distribution within the group. The objective is 

max  

> θ

Ex∼D RL , τ ∼πθ (·| x) [R(x, τ )] , (8) optimized via the standard GRPO update. After RL training, the U NI BROWSE agent achieves robust multimodal browsing capabilities with improved trajectory efficiency and answer accuracy. 

C Web-Augmented Attribute Expansion 

This appendix provides additional implementation details for the web-augmented grounding step in Section 3.1. The goal is to enrich each graph en-tity with attributes that are likely to appear in real web evidence, while avoiding one-off or unsup-ported claims. For an entity node v, U NI BROWSE 

searches the web for entity-related pages, extracts candidate attribute statements from each page, and retains only attributes that are repeatedly supported by independent pages. Algorithm 1 Web-Augmented Attribute Expansion for an Entity Node 

Require: Entity node v, search engine Search ,page summarizer Summarize , LLM extractor 

Extract , minimum page count Nmin = 5 , sup-port threshold γ = 3 

Ensure: Verified attribute set A(v) 

> 1:

Construct search queries Q(v) using the entity name, aliases, and graph-neighbor hints.  

> 2:

Retrieve candidate webpages P(v) ←

Search( Q(v)) . 

> 3:

Initialize candidate multiset M ← ∅ . 

> 4:

for all webpage p ∈ P (v) do  

> 5:

Obtain a query-conditioned summary 

dp ← Summarize( p, v ). 

> 6:

Extract candidate attributes Cp ←

Extract( v, d p) using the prompt in Figure 4.  

> 7:

for all candidate attribute c ∈ C p do  

> 8:

if c is specific, entity-grounded, and not contradicted by dp then  

> 9:

Normalize c into a canonical at-tribute form and add (c, p ) to M. 

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

Group semantically equivalent candidates in 

M across webpages.  

> 14:

Retain an attribute c if it is supported by at least γ distinct webpages and the total number of usable webpages is at least Nmin . 

> 15:

return A(v) = {c : support( c) ≥ γ}.

Extraction and aggregation. In practice, we use at least five usable webpages for each entity when-ever available. Each webpage is first summarized with the target entity in mind; the extractor then proposes attributes that can be used as additional descriptors or constraints in question construction. We normalize near-duplicate attributes with an LLM judge, merge semantically equivalent claims, and keep only attributes that appear in at least three independent webpages. This threshold favors sta-ble properties such as roles, affiliations, locations, creators, functions, awards, visible characteristics, or notable associated works, while discarding rare claims that are likely to be noisy, promotional, or context-specific. Task

Input image The image points to a country. In that country, find the navigational aid in the state

whose capital was founded in the mid-16th century and later recaptured. It has the

same light pattern as a Green Bay lighthouse, and is equipped with a large lens and

radio guidance. What color pattern appears on its tower?

Displayed reasoning path

image/title → Brazil → text search → Bahia → summary → Abrolhos → image check →

stripes

> I2T

Image-to-text

search

Tool: search

search_type: "image_to_text"

image_index: 0

<tool_response>

Image: Christ the Redeemer

Title: "Christ the Redeemer"

Text cue: Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

</tool_response>

<reason> The returned image and title identify a Brazilian landmark, so the country clue is Brazil. </reason>

...

> Text

Text search Tool: search

search_type: "text_only"       

> query:"Brazilstatecapitalfounded1549recaptured1625"

<tool_response> Salvador was founded

in 1549 and recaptured in 1625. It is the

capital of Bahia. </tool_response>

<reason> State resolved: Bahia. </reason>

...

> Summary

LinkSummary Tool: linksummary

url: https://www.ibiblio.org/lighthouse/brba.htm

question: "Which Bahia lighthouse has a white flash every 6 seconds,

a large Fresnel lens, and radio-based guidance?"

<tool_response> The Bahia lighthouse directory identifies the matching navigational aid as

Abrolhos Lighthouse on Ilha de Santa Barbara. </tool_response>

<reason> Bahia constraints select Abrolhos Lighthouse. </reason>

> T2I

Text-to-image

search Tool: search

search_type: "text_to_image"

query: "Abrolhos Lighthouse Ilha de Santa Barbara Bahia tower"

<reason> The returned image shows the resolved lighthouse tower, making the visual

attribute directly observable. </reason>

<tool_response> Abrolhos Lighthouse image: black-and-white horizontal bands. </tool_response>

> Answer

<answer> black and white horizontal stripes </answer>

The final answer is supplied by the last visual verification step.Figure 3: A case study of U NI BROWSE on a multimodal browsing question. Per-Page Attribute Extraction Prompt 

You are helping construct reliable web-grounded attributes for a BrowseComp-style question. 

Entity: {entity_name} 

Known graph context: {neighbor_entities_and_relations} 

Webpage summary: {page_summary} Extract candidate attributes of the entity that are explicitly supported by the webpage. Each attribute should be useful as a clue, constraint, or descriptor in a multi-hop browsing question. Prefer stable and verifiable properties, such as affiliation, location, creator, time, award, function, material, visual feature, associated work, or role. Do not infer attributes that are not stated or strongly supported. Do not include generic descriptions such as “famous”, “important”, or “well-known”. Return a JSON list. Each item should contain: attribute , attribute_type , evidence_span , and confidence .

Figure 4: Prompt used to extract candidate attributes from a single webpage summary. 

Cross-Page Attribute Aggregation Prompt 

You are verifying candidate attributes extracted for the same entity from multiple webpages. 

Entity: {entity_name} 

Candidate attributes with sources: {attribute_source_list} Group semantically equivalent attributes, count the number of distinct webpages supporting each group, and keep only attributes supported by at least three independent webpages. Remove attributes that are vague, promotional, contradictory, or not specifically about the target entity. For each retained attribute, output a concise canonical statement, its attribute type, supporting source ids, and a short reason explaining why it is stable enough for question construction. Return a JSON list with fields: canonical_attribute , attribute_type , supporting_sources , and 

verification_reason .

Figure 5: Prompt used to aggregate and verify repeated attributes across webpages. D Illustration of Exploration Degree 

This section illustrates the exploration degree E(q) introduced in Section 3.3 with a concrete example. The question is a text-to-image BrowseComp problem: textual browsing narrows the target entity and visual search supplies the final answer. 

Question. “The 2021 International Eco-Design Award shortlisted several urban furniture projects. One shortlisted project was designed by the studio that later created the wayfinding system for the Northbank Wetland Center. Find the official logo of that studio and answer: what animal silhouette appears in the logo?” The ground-truth answer is crane .

Key evidence steps π. During construction, the pipeline derives a set of key evidence steps from the layered subgraph that underlies the question. These steps represent the core pieces of information that any successful trajectory should cover, but they are not a rigid chain: the subgraph structure may allow different browsing orders. For this question, the set π is: 

ρ1 Retrieve the shortlist of the 2021 International Eco-Design Award for urban furniture. 

ρ2 Among the shortlisted projects, identify the project designed by the studio that also created the Northbank Wetland Center wayfinding system. 

ρ3 Confirm the studio name as Marshline Design .

ρ4 Search for the official logo of Marshline Design .

ρ5 Inspect the logo and answer crane .The set contains |π| = 5 key steps. For a successful trajectory τ , we measure its exploration length ℓ(τ, π )

as the number of browsing actions (search / linksummary calls) it takes, normalized by |π|. Since |π| is fixed per question, ℓ reflects how much browsing effort a successful route expends, regardless of the order in which the steps are covered. 

Rollout examples. We present two successful rollouts obtained from the base agent. Both reach the correct answer and cover all five key evidence steps, but they differ substantially in how much browsing they require.                

> Step Trajectory A (direct route) Matched ρ
> 1Search “2021 International Eco-Design Award urban furniture shortlist.” ρ1
> 2Extract the list of shortlisted projects and studios from the award page. ρ1
> 3Search “Northbank Wetland Center wayfinding system design studio.” ρ2
> 4Identify that Marshline Design created the wayfinding system. ρ2, ρ 3
> 5Search “Marshline Design official logo.” ρ4
> 6Inspect the logo image; the silhouette is a crane. ρ5

Table 5: Trajectory A: a compact browsing path with no dead ends. It takes 6 browsing steps and covers all five key evidence steps, so ℓ = 6 /5 = 1 .2.                        

> Step Trajectory B (reformulation-heavy route) Matched ρ
> 1Search “2021 International Eco-Design Award urban furniture winner.” ρ1
> 2Summarize the winner page; it does not list the shortlisted projects. ρ1
> 3Reformulate: search “. . . urban furniture shortlist”; extract the projects. ρ1
> 4Search “Northbank Wetland Center wayfinding system designer.” ρ2
> 5Summarize an ambiguous page mentioning several studios (dead end). ρ2
> 6Reformulate: search “. . . signage studio Marshline.” ρ2
> 7Confirm Marshline Design created the wayfinding system. ρ3
> 8Search “Marshline Design official logo.” ρ4
> 9Inspect the logo image; the silhouette is a crane. ρ5
> 10 Emit the final answer: crane .ρ5

Table 6: Trajectory B: the agent reaches the same answer through a longer, reformulation-heavy route with a dead-end source before recovering. It takes 10 browsing steps and also covers all five key evidence steps, so 

ℓ = 10 /5 = 2 .0.Both trajectories reach the correct answer and cover the same key evidence steps, yet they differ substantially in exploration length ( ℓ = 1 .2 for Trajectory A versus ℓ = 2 .0 for Trajectory B), reflecting genuinely different browsing behaviors. 

Exploration degree of the example. Assume that for this question q we sample 16 rollouts and the subset of successful rollouts Y+(q) contains trajectories with exploration lengths distributed similarly to the two examples above—some around 1.2 (direct routes) and others around 2.0 (reformulation-heavy routes). The exploration degree is the variance of ℓ across Y+(q):

E(q) = Var τ ∈Y +(q)

ℓ(τ, π ). (9) A high E(q) indicates that successful trajectories vary substantially in browsing effort: some rollouts follow a compact direct route, while others reach the answer through longer reformulation-heavy or backtracking exploration. As discussed in Section 3.3, such instances are more likely to produce mixed-outcome groups (both successes and informative failures) during RL, providing rich contrastive signals for policy learning. In contrast, a problem where all correct trajectories require essentially the same browsing effort would yield near-zero variance, offering little behavioral contrast.