Title: Leak-Resistant Unlearning: A New Benchmark for Evaluating Multi-Hop Reasoning Consistency and Recovery Robustness

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.04519v1

Published Time: Thu, 06 Aug 2026 00:34:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# Leak-Resistant Unlearning: A New Benchmark for Evaluating Multi-Hop Reasoning Consistency and Recovery Robustness 

## Haoting Qian 1, Qingjie Zhang 1, Zhicong Huang 2, Cheng Hong 2, Han Qiu 1,∗

> 1

## Tsinghua University, China. 2Ant Group, China. 

## Emails: 2022210356@bupt.cn, qiuhan@tsinghua.edu.cn 

## Abstract 

Benchmarking machine unlearning methods is critical to understand whether sensitive knowl-edge is removed from large language models (LLMs) or not. Current unlearning benchmarks include mainly single-hop questions and a nar-row set of multi-hop questions. Although effec-tive, they still face two challenges. (1) Knowledge is not isolated, whereby diverse multi-hop reasoning paths can potentially in-duce knowledge leakage than normal queries. (2) Unlearning may be fragile: unlearned knowledge can be partially recovered through recovery attacks such as lightweight post-unlearning adaptation, making static evaluation insufficient. Therefore, in this paper, we intro-duce Leak-resistant Unlearning as a novel benchmark to understand robust LLM knowl-edge removal across diverse reasoning paths and recovery attacks. We experiment with this benchmark on 3 models, 6 unlearning meth-ods, and 2 carefully curated datasets. Results show that existing methods are vulnerable to multi-hop reasoning paths and recovery attacks. We further explore the trade-off among forget quality, robustness, and model utility for LLM unlearning. 1

## 1 Introduction 

Nowadays, issues about that LLMs can memorize sensitive or copyrighted knowledge have become more pressing (Xiong et al., 2025). One potential solution is unlearning methods to remove target knowledge from trained models while preserving the model’s utility (Liu et al., 2025). However, recent works (Shah and Le, 2025) also indicate that the unlearned knowledge may be recovered via entangled knowledge (Shumailov et al., 2024) or sophisticated attacks (Yuan et al., 2025). Existing unlearning benchmarks primarily focus on direct single-hop questions or a narrow range of  

> *Corresponding author.
> 1We open-source at https://leak-resistant.site

Figure 1: Compared with existing unlearning bench-marks, our benchmark extends with two complemen-tary dimensions: diverse multi-hop reasoning structures and recovery attacks, providing a more stringent test of 

Leak-resistant Unlearning .

chain-style multi-hop questions (Shi et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024a). However, recent works indicated that unlearning may not be robust with two reasons (Figure 1). (1) Unlearned knowledge may be tan-gled with other knowledge (Shumailov et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2026), so diverse multi-hop reasoning paths expose greater risks of knowledge leakage than simple queries. For instance, an unlearned LLM may fail to answer the nationality of Tom Cruise while it can still succeed in answering the continent of his country (Yang et al., 2025b). (2) Attackers may also develop sophisticated recovery attacks. For instance, FocusOnKey (Zhang et al., 2025a) reports an unlearning failure on 6 widely-used unlearning methods across 3 models. In this paper, we introduce a novel benchmark 

Leak-resistant Unlearning , which aims to un-arXiv:2608.04519v1 [cs.AI] 5 Aug 2026 derstand LLM knowledge removal robustness con-sidering two properties. (1) Whether target knowl-edge can be retrieved through indirect multi-hop reasoning paths . (2) Whether target knowledge can be restored by recovery attacks without additional information . Accordingly, we organize multi-hop access into 6 logic-inspired reasoning structures, and combine it with prompt-based and parameter-level recovery attacks. Based on this framework, we build a data construction pipeline that extracts structured knowledge, composes single-hop facts into logic-guided multi-hop questions, and fil-ters them through automated quality verification. This unified design enables a comprehensive and recovery-aware assessment of how much unlearned knowledge remains. In this benchmark, we evaluate 6 unlearning methods, 3 recovery methods, and 3 LLMs across 2 datasets. Our results reveal critical vulnerabili-ties missed by previous benchmarks. (1) Certain reasoning structures leak significantly more knowl-edge than traditional direct or chain-style queries. Multi-hop queries are often easier to recover than single-hop ones. (2) Unlearned knowledge remains highly vulnerable to recovery attacks. Moreover, we further explore and discuss that existing unlearn-ing methods are hard to achieve a high forget qual-ity, model utility and robustness simultaneously (i.e., an “ideal triangle”). Our contributions are threefold. • We propose Leak-resistant Unlearning , a benchmark for evaluating knowledge removal in LLMs under diverse multi-hop reasoning paths and recovery attacks. • We introduce 6 logic-inspired reasoning struc-tures that enable fine-grained benchmarking of path consistency. Then, we design a generation pipeline to curate novel datasets based on 2 exist-ing datasets (i.e., MQuAKE and Books). • We benchmark across 3 LLMs, 6 unlearning methods, and 3 recovery methods. Results show that current methods are not robust under dif-ferent reasoning paths, vulnerable to recovery attacks, and exhibit a trade-off among forget qual-ity, robustness, and utility. 

## 2 Preliminaries 

2.1 Related Work Machine unlearning and recovery attack . Ma-chine unlearning has been widely studied as a way to let LLMs forget privacy-sensitive or copyrighted content. Existing methods mainly fall into sev-eral categories: gradient-based approaches that re-verse the training objective (Jang et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024), preference-optimization-based meth-ods that treat forget examples as negatives (Zhang et al., 2024; Mekala et al., 2025), model-editing approaches that remove knowledge by modify-ing specific parameters (Ilharco et al., 2023), and parameter-free methods that suppress target outputs via prefixes or prompts without updating model weights (Pawelczyk et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2026). Recovery attacks aim to elicit unlearned knowledge from the model. Prior work suggests that such knowledge is often not fully erased, but merely becomes less accessible under benchmark evalua-tion (Hu et al., 2025; Shumailov et al., 2024). Ex-isting recovery approaches can be divided into two groups: prompt-based recovery, which reactivates target knowledge through query rewriting, auxil-iary prompts, or decoding changes (Scholten et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025a), and model-intervention-based recovery, which restores knowledge by modi-fying the model itself (Hu et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025b) (e.g., continued training or quantization). 

Multi-hop Reasoning refers to inferring informa-tion by connecting multiple pieces of evidence distributed across different documents, passages, or contexts (Huang and Chang, 2023). Because multi-hop reasoning can take diverse forms, dif-ferent prompts or decomposition strategies may lead models to follow different intermediate rea-soning paths (Wei et al., 2026). Such reasoning diversity poses an underexplored challenge for ma-chine unlearning, because knowledge that appears removed under one query form may remain recov-erable through correlated facts or multi-step infer-ence under another (Zhou et al., 2023). 

Unlearning benchmarks have evolved from un-learning simple QA pairs to comprehensive multi-dimensional assessments. Existing benchmarks mainly focus on single-hop questions (Shi et al., 2024; Maini et al., 2024; Cao et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024a), assessing only isolated knowledge removal. However, Recent work (Choi et al., 2024) shows that existing unlearning benchmarks have not explored multi-hop knowledge. New ap-proaches (Wu et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025b; Da-hal et al., 2026) aim to benchmark unlearning in more realistic scenarios by incorporating multi-hop questions and handling directly connected knowl-edge pieces. However, they focus mainly on chain-based multi-hop questions. Thus, as shown in Ta-Table 1: Comparison with some representative unlearning benchmarks.                                                            

> Benchmark Focused Multi-hop Logical Recovery Faithfulness Cross-method domain reasoning types attacks focus eval
> MUSE Books/Fiction ××××✓
> TOFU Fictitious Q&A Limited ×××✓
> WMDP Dangerous knowledge ××××✓
> MQuAKE World knowledge ✓Single type ×Partial Limited FaithUn Real-world Q&A ✓Single type ×✓Limited Eval-DU Fictitious Q&A ✓Single type ×Partial Limited GONE General knowledge ✓Single type ×✓Limited
> Ours General knowledge ✓Six types ✓✓✓

ble 1, Leak-resistant Unlearning provides a benchmark by covering diverse multi-hop reason-ing structures and recovery attacks. 

2.2 Leak-resistant Unlearning 

Instead of defining unlearning solely by the failure to recall isolated facts, we introduce 

Leak-resistant Unlearning as a novel bench-mark. Specifically, we consider an unlearning pro-cess to be leak-resistant when it satisfies two prac-tical conditions. (1) Path Consistency: The un-learned knowledge remains inaccessible across di-verse multi-hop reasoning paths. (2) Recovery Robustness: The knowledge cannot be elicited even when subjected to post-hoc recovery methods. In this paper, Leak-resistant Unlearning is not treated as a new algorithmic objective, but rather as a goal assessed by our proposed multi-hop and recovery benchmark framework. This concept differs from recent related efforts in scope and emphasis. Faithful unlearning (Yang et al., 2025b) focuses on removing the target knowl-edge together with its semantically connected vari-ants while preserving irrelevant knowledge, thereby emphasizing context-sensitive and faithful unlearn-ing. Deep unlearning (Wu et al., 2025) focuses on preventing the target fact from being logically deduced from retained supporting facts, thereby emphasizing the removal of deductive inferabil-ity through connected knowledge. In contrast, 

Leak-resistant Unlearning requires unlearned knowledge to remain inaccessible under diverse reasoning paths and recovery attacks, thereby em-phasizing robustness against leakage. 

## 3 Logic-Inspired Reasoning Categories 

To effectively benchmark Path Consistency defined in section 2, it is essential to formalize various paths, where a model might access seemingly un-learned knowledge. We characterize the reasoning paths through which unlearned knowledge may remain accessible. Inspired by the taxonomy in (Parmar et al., 2024; Mavi et al., 2024), we de-velop categories of 6 multi-hop reasoning paths with different logical structures (see details in Ap-pendix C), each representing a distinct pathway that unlearning methods should defend against. • Hypothetical Syllogism (HS) is formulated as 

(A → B) ∧ (B → C) ⊢ (A → C), capturing the transitive property of relations. It requires the model to traverse chains of facts to derive a final conclusion. It accesses model knowledge through chained relational composition. • Modus Ponens (MP) is formulated as A →

B ∧ A ⊢ B. It requires the model to instanti-ate a general rule and apply it to a specific case. It accesses model knowledge by combining an abstract rule with an individual instance instead of directly querying the final fact. • Leibniz’s Law (LL) is formulated as x = y ∧

A(x) ⊢ A(y). It requires the model to transfer attributes between equivalent entities. It accesses model knowledge through entity equivalence, al-lowing the model to recover a property of one mention via another co-referring or alias. • Conjunctive Composition (CC) is formulated as x ∈ A ∧ x ∈ B ⊢ x ∈ A ∩ B. It requires the model to identify the intersection of multiple sets or features and overlapping information from distinct contexts. It accesses model knowledge by combining multiple conditions to locate their shared implication, instead of retrieving a single fact in isolation. • Disjunctive Syllogism (DS) is formulated as 

(A ∨ B) ∧ ¬ A ⊢ B. It requires the model to eliminate one candidate and infer the remaining alternative. It accesses model knowledge through the exclusion of competing possibilities. Figure 2: Cases of 6 types of questions. All questions stem from the single-hop knowledge: “The apple is red.” 

• Modus Tollens (MT) is formulated as (A →

B) ∧ ¬ B ⊢ ¬ A. It requires the model to reason from a negated consequence back to its negated premise. It accesses model knowledge through backward inferential dependency, testing whether LLMs can recover implicit knowledge from a failed or contradicted outcome. 

## 4 Data Construction 

As shown in Figure 3, we propose a structured pipeline for constructing multi-hop benchmarks from existing single-hop datasets. Guided by our carefully designed logic-inspired reasoning cate-gories, the pipeline effectively transforms straight-forward single-hop instances into more complex multi-hop questions. Using this pipeline, we suc-cessfully curated various multi-hop benchmarks of MQuAKE and Books. 

4.1 Knowledge Extraction 

In this step, we extract relevant knowledge struc-tures based on existing text. Prompt templates are provided in Appendix E. First, we segment raw text into fixed-size chunks based on word count, which are adjusted to pre-serve sentence integrity and maintain semantic co-herence. Second, we use an LLM to extract struc-tured knowledge from each chunk with carefully designed prompts. These prompts identify and extract relational knowledge based on logical struc-ture. Third, we post-process the extracted tuples through deduplication and quality filtering to en-sure consistency and accuracy. While some datasets are built upon pre-existing structured knowledge graphs with 

(subject, relation, object ) triples. We directly incorporate these high-quality annotations into our knowledge base. 

4.2 Multi-hop Question Generation 

Given a set of single-hop triples, we compose multi-hop questions in two stages: 

Structural matching. We first pair facts according to the join conditions dictated by each reasoning type in our categories. The most common condition is object–subject chaining (o1 = s2), where the ob-ject of one fact becomes the subject of another. This pattern underlies three reasoning types: HS, MP, and MT. However, MP additionally requires seman-tically meaningful relation pairs, while MT inverts the reasoning direction. The remaining types use different joins: LL pairs a fact with an alias of its subject; CC groups facts sharing the same (r, o )

across distinct subjects; DS requires ≥3 candidate values under one relation to construct an elimina-tion set. Each matcher produces matching pairs with three labels: the bridge entity, target, and ex-pected answer. 

LLM-based generation. The matched pairs are passed to GPT-4o via type-specific prompts. The bridge entity is masked , and the model is in-structed to produce 3 diverse paraphrases along with 0–3 answer aliases. A critical constraint is that the forgotten fact must remain implicit : the question must not lexically expose the edit target, forcing the model to rely on internalized knowl-edge. For example, given the chain Louis Joseph –[citizenship]–> [BRIDGE] –[continent]–> Europe , the prompt reads “compose questions about which continent Louis Joseph held citizen-ship in, without mentioning France .” We retain one question per pair for the final dataset. 

4.3 Automated Quality Verification 

We apply two LLM-based validation checks to filter out ill-formed questions. 

Decomposition Consistency. We use an indepen-dent LLM to decompose each multi-hop question Figure 3: Overview of Multi-hop Question Construction Pipeline, including (a) Knowledge Extraction, (b) Multi-hop Question Generation, and (c) Automated Quality Verification. 

back into single-hop questions, to verify if the de-composed questions align with the original fact pair in subject, relation, and answer. For instance, the question above is decomposed into “What is the country of citizenship of Louis Joseph?” (an-swer: France) and “Which continent is France lo-cated in?” (answer: Europe). Questions whose decompositions skip intermediate reasoning steps or introduce extraneous entities are discarded. 

Answer uniqueness. We further use another LLM to judge whether the questions admit a unique, un-ambiguous answer. For example, questions like “Name a country associated with this person” are rejected because of having multiple valid answers, while “In which continent did Louis Joseph hold citizenship?” passes as it yields only one answer. 

## 5 Experimental Setup 

5.1 Evaluated Models 

We benchmark 3 LLMs with different param-eter counts: Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Grattafiori et al., 2024), Qwen3-14B (Yang et al., 2025a), and Qwen3-32B (Yang et al., 2025a). These models constitute robust baselines for unlearning assess-ment, demonstrating consistently high performance (>80% acc) across benchmarks. Results for the base model are shown in Appendix F. 

5.2 Baseline Methods 

We adopt 6 unlearning methods (see more details in Appendix D): • Gradient Ascent (GA) (Jang et al., 2023) mod-ifies the training objective from minimizing the likelihood in conventional learning to maximiz-ing it, therefore achieving unlearning. • Negative Preference Optimization (NPO) 

(Zhang et al., 2024) utilizes preference optimiza-tion techniques by treating forget set as negative exemplars to realize unlearning. • Representation Misdirection for Unlearning (RMU) (Li et al., 2024b) achieves unlearning through a dual-loss function. Forget loss perturbs representations of sensitive knowledge, while re-tention loss maintains benign data activations close to the original model state. • Task Vector (TV) (Ilharco et al., 2023) encodes task-specific knowledge as the weight difference between a fine-tuned model and the pre-trained model, and removes such knowledge by subtract-ing this vector to achieve unlearning. • Prefix-Aware Localized Unlearning (PALU) 

(Zhai et al., 2026) achieves unlearning through dual entropy maximization, intervening selec-tively on initial tokens and top-K logits. • Attention-Shifting framework (AS) (Tan et al., 2026) modifies attention mechanisms by sup-pressing attention to important tokens in the for-get set while enhancing attention to important tokens in the retain set. 

5.3 Recovery Methods 

We measure the robustness of unlearning meth-ods using 3 recovery methods (see details in Ap-pendix D). A robust unlearning method should consistently resist knowledge recovery. • Probab (Scholten et al., 2025) points out simple multinomial sampling rather than greedy decod-ing can retrieve LLMs’ unlearned knowledge. • FocusOnKey (Zhang et al., 2025a) assumes that apparent unlearning mainly reflects reduced at-tention to key tokens instead of true knowledge erasure, and the unlearned knowledge can be re-covered simply by repeating those tokens. • Quantization (Zhang et al., 2025b) assumes weight changes in unlearning are smaller than quantization step sizes due to the need for util-ity preservation, causing original and unlearned models to be identical under quantization. 

5.4 Benchmark Metrics 

We design three metrics for Leak-resistant Unlearning benchmark from forget quality, recov-ery robustness, and utility preservation. • Forget Quality. Because original models have different initial performance across benchmarks, absolute metrics (e.g., ROUGE-L or Accuracy) do not directly indicate unlearning effectiveness. We adopt a relative metric for path consistency: 

F Q (θu, θ p, Q n) = 1 − Acc (θu, Q n)

Acc (θp, Q n) (1) • Recovery Rate quantifies the proportion of un-learned knowledge that can be restored following a recovery attack, calculated as follows: 

RR (θu, S suc ) = 

P 

> xi∈Ssuc

V (fθu (Tattack (xi)) , y gt )

|Ssuc |

(2) • Reasoning Ability measures the model’s reason-ing capabilities, measured through relative perfor-mance on Big Bench Hard (Suzgun et al., 2023), which includes multi-hop arithmetic, boolean ex-pressions, sports understanding, and many kinds of complex reasoning tasks. Results will be nor-malized to the original model’s performance ac-cording to base model’s performance. 

5.5 Basic Datasets 

We build our benchmark on two complementary datasets covering factual and fictional knowledge: • MQuAKE (Zhong et al., 2023) is constructed based on Wikidata. • Books (Shi et al., 2024) consists of the Harry Potter book series. 

## 6 Main Results and Analysis 

We conduct the main experiments comprehensively and list the main results in this section. Additional experiments are in Appendix F. 

6.1 Evaluating Unlearning Across Multi-hop Reasoning Paths 

Table 2 reports the Forget Quality of 6 unlearning methods across single-hop questions and 6 multi- 

> Table 2: Forget Quality of Unlearning Algorithms Across Different Models. Negative FQ means that after unlearning, the accuracy of this type improves.

Algo SH HS MT DS LL MP CC Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct 

GA 72.0 82.8 88.6 33.3 69.1 76.7 74.7 NPO 71.9 60.6 26.8 31.4 59.9 63.0 44.3 TV 59.0 63.5 27.6 34.9 39.8 52.7 69.4 PALU 21.0 11.3 14.6 78.6 76.0 -26.0 80.6 RMU 22.0 33.0 10.6 81.3 81.6 6.8 87.9 AS 5.8 -16.3 -43.9 71.0 61.5 -54.8 72.5 

Qwen3-14B 

GA 29.3 24.1 84.0 7.4 25.5 29.8 52.3 NPO 28.4 25.3 51.9 4.7 24.1 27.5 33.2 TV 60.9 70.5 40.6 25.8 39.4 70.8 65.7 PALU 80.4 67.4 -0.9 79.8 82.3 62.9 85.7 RMU 17.7 21.5 31.1 14.3 19.0 31.5 10.8 

AS 56.5 39.8 65.1 78.5 36.7 30.9 47.3 

Qwen3-32B 

GA 17.6 34.1 55.5 17.6 18.0 20.0 25.4 NPO 58.9 65.9 41.8 15.9 50.0 55.0 66.1 TV 69.0 76.8 52.1 31.6 57.7 65.0 70.6 PALU 61.9 47.9 11.6 24.1 40.5 48.9 13.0 RMU 50.7 49.4 33.6 29.5 41.8 45.6 35.4 AS 16.1 10.5 14.4 35.6 29.1 33.3 18.8 hop reasoning paths on 3 LLMs. A consistent pat-tern emerges: unlearning performance varies sub-stantially across reasoning structures, instead of remaining uniform for a given method. This indi-cates that forgetting difficulty is highly sensitive to how the target knowledge is accessed. To highlight the most challenging cases, we bold the score corresponding to the most resistant struc-ture for each method and underline the second most resistant one. The results indicate that limiting benchmarking to the commonly used SH and HS structures can substantially overestimate unlearn-ing performance. For instance, on Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct with TV, Forget Quality reaches 63.5 un-der HS, but drops dramatically to 27.6 under MT, showing that target knowledge remains far more difficult to suppress under MT-style reasoning. In other words, strong performance on HS does not necessarily imply robust unlearning across alterna-tive reasoning paths. 

We further observe clear differences across method families. For GA, NPO, and TV, DS structure is consistently among the most resis-tant types across the three models, suggesting that elimination-based reasoning remains particularly difficult to suppress for these parameter-updating methods. In contrast, token-specific methods such as PALU and AS exhibit the opposite trend: DS becomes relatively easy to forget, while MT and MP are often much more resistant. In several cases, these methods produce negative Forget Quality on MT or MP, meaning that post-unlearning accuracy on those reasoning structures becomes higher than before unlearning. Representation-based unlearn-ing methods such as RMU show more variable behavior across model architectures. This suggests that their effectiveness may depend more strongly on model-specific representation geometry. 

Finding 1: Some reasoning paths are signifi-cantly more resistant to unlearning than the commonly studied HS type. 6.2 Recovery of Unlearned Knowledge 

Table 3 reports recovery rates under three recov-ery methods for all unlearned models, comparing single-hop (SH) and multi-hop (MH) queries. We can observe some interesting phenomena. First, recovery rates on single-hop questions are substantially above zero, indicating that the unlearned knowledge is not fully erased and can still be recovered. Consequently, low accuracy on straightforward questions does not necessarily im-ply successful unlearning. Second, multi-hop questions are often easier to recover than single-hop questions. Across most of tested models, five unlearning methods (GA, NPO, TV, RMU and PALU) show higher recovery rates when faced with multi-hop reasoning tasks com-pared to single-hop questions. The overall pattern clearly shows that indirect questioning is possibly more effective in extracting erased knowledge. Together, these results suggest that current un-learning methods are inherently far from recovery-robustness : unlearned knowledge can be easily re-covered without introducing additional knowledge. More worryingly, Recovery Rate of multi-hop ques-tions is often more effective than single-hop ques-tions. This pattern indicates that unlearning meth-ods primarily work by suppressing surface-level fact retrieval paths, with little impact on deeper relational knowledge structures. When these un-derlying knowledge networks remain intact, they can support indirect reasoning, successfully re-constructing information that should have been  

> Table 3: Performance on P ROBAB , Q UANT , and F O-
> CUS ONKEY Recover Rate, SH represents single-hop questions, MH represents Multi-hop questions, F OKrepresents FocusOnKey.

Algo PROBAB QUANT FOKSH MH SH MH SH MH Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct 

GA 42.4 56.3 85.7 88.5 51.9 62.5 

NPO 49.2 59.1 82.3 81.8 30.9 34.0 

TV 32.6 44.0 39.0 47.1 12.9 16.6 

PALU 4.0 5.9 4.0 12.9 0.9 2.4 

RMU 73.5 76.3 59.2 76.3 59.2 59.6 

AS 78.1 66.7 55.9 49.3 78.9 59.7 

Qwen3-14B 

GA 18.0 12.1 79.7 84.0 8.6 11.2 

NPO 29.8 31.7 82.1 80.2 25.3 20.9 TV 15.9 22.2 66.4 67.3 16.9 31.2 

PALU 51.8 61.3 51.2 61.6 41.2 56.0 

RMU 32.1 35.2 27.6 28.7 35.5 23.2 AS 96.0 87.5 79.0 86.5 90.9 88.8 

Qwen3-32B 

GA 82.6 87.5 77.7 85.7 95.0 93.3 NPO 39.0 47.0 86.9 87.4 34.1 37.9 

TV 32.5 37.2 56.8 56.0 29.9 37.9 

PALU 30.3 47.3 0.0 1.0 18.5 39.9 

RMU 33.7 42.1 17.9 19.4 28.9 38.8 

AS 90.8 90.8 0.0 4.0 0.0 0.0 erased. Therefore, evaluating unlearning effects us-ing only simple, straightforward questions is likely to severely underestimate the actual accessibility of sensitive information in the models. 

Finding 2: Unlearned knowledge remains recoverable to existing attacks, and multi-hop queries are often easier to recover than single-hop ones. 6.3 Empirical Trade-off among Forget Quality, Robustness, and Utility 

Figure 4 shows the performance of 6 unlearning methods across three dimensions using radar charts. Each vertex represents one benchmarking dimen-sion: Forget Quality, Robustness measured as 1-max(RR), and Utility Preservation. Higher values toward the outer boundary indicate better perfor-mance. The ideal unlearning method would appear as a large triangle touching all three outer edges (i.e., maximizing all three metrics). Figure 4: The “Ideal Triangle” of Machine Unlearning, which indicates existing unlearning methods cannot achieve  

> Leak-resistant Unlearning while preserving model utility. Sub-figures in the first row are results on MQuAKE, Sub-figures in the second row are on Books.

Our experimental results reveal an empirical trade-off: no algorithm approaches the ideal outer triangle. Instead, all methods are constrained to a much smaller feasible region, creating an “impossi-ble triangle” where improvements in one dimension consistently come at the expense of others. Specifically, the benchmark reveals distinct performance patterns across different algorith-mic approaches. Take the results on MQuAKE with Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct as an example, PALU achieves the best unlearning performance (93.0% forget quality) and strong robustness against re-covery attacks (87.1%), but this comes at a steep cost: It severely damages the model’s general ca-pabilities, reducing BBH performance to half of the original model (49.9%). On the opposite side, RMU preserves the model’s utility almost perfectly (99.2%), but it fails badly at the core task: It doesn’t effectively remove target knowledge and remains highly vulnerable to recovery methods. TV falls somewhere in between these extremes, offering a more balanced approach, yet it still cannot achieve the ideal combination of strong forgetting, robust defense, and preserved utility. Importantly, similar trade-offs appear across model families and scales. No matter which model we use, or which benchmark we test on, no method succeeds at all three goals simultaneously. This suggests that observed trade-off may not be an arti-fact of a particular model architecture or scale. These results also highlight the limitation of eval-uating unlearning with a single metric. A method with high forget quality may still be inadequate if the removed knowledge can be recovered, while a utility-preserving method cannot be considered successful if the target knowledge remains acces-sible through multi-hop reasoning. A complete benchmark requires jointly considering forgetting, robustness, and utility. 

Finding 3: Leak-resistant Unlearning is hard to achieve while preserving reasoning ability. 

## 7 Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduce a novel benchmark 

Leak-resistant Unlearning that evaluates not only direct queries and limited multi-hop questions, but also whether unlearned knowledge remains la-tent in the model. Through tests on diverse rea-soning paths and recovery attacks, we find that current unlearning methods are limited: unlearned knowledge can leak through alternative reasoning structures, and such knowledge is often easy to recover, sometimes more so with multi-hop than single-hop ones. Overall, existing approaches still struggle to balance forget quality, robustness, and preserving general utility. 8 Limitations 

LLM-based Data Construction. Our pipeline re-lies on LLMs for knowledge extraction, multi-hop question generation, reasoning decomposition, and semantic judgment. Although we apply strict filter-ing steps, these LLM-driven procedures may still introduce subtle noise, artificial shortcuts, or bench-marking bias. Specifically, relying on an "LLM-as-a-judge" paradigm is susceptible to familiar failure modes and may not always perfectly align with nuanced human evaluation. 

Limited Experimental Scope. Our empirical eval-uation covers 3 representative LLMs, 6 unlearning algorithms, 3 recovery methods, and 2 benchmark settings. Additionally, our reliance on parameter-level manipulation restricts this evaluation exclu-sively to open-weight architectures, leaving the un-learning dynamics of black-box commercial APIs (e.g., GPT-4) unaddressed. While this provides a reasonably broad foundation, it cannot exhaust the rapidly expanding space of novel model architec-tures, unlearning frameworks, and sophisticated adversarial attacks. Therefore, our conclusions should be interpreted as strong evidence of gen-eral trends rather than definitive universal claims. 

Focus on Factual Knowledge. Our benchmark is designed for the unlearning of explicit fac-tual knowledge and its associated reasoning struc-tures. Other dimensions of unlearning, such as erasing privacy-related memorization, copyrighted text spans, or implicit harmful behaviors, still ex-hibit different representation mechanics and remain strictly beyond the scope of this study. 

Language Scope Restriction. Our benchmark datasets and evaluation protocols are primarily con-structed in English. Since prior literature demon-strates that LLMs inherently possess strong cross-lingual transfer capabilities, whether unlearned fac-tual knowledge can still leak through cross-lingual multi-hop queries (e.g., prompting the model to reason in languages other than English) remains a critical but underexplored dimension in our current evaluation framework. 

## 9 Ethics Statement 

ACL Ethics Policy is respected in this work. This work studies the unlearning of LLMs. The data we used is from the public unlearning benchmark under open-source licenses. 

## References 

Pengfei Cao, Chenhao Wang, Zhitao He, Hongbang Yuan, Jiachun Li, Yubo Chen, Kang Liu, Jun Zhao, and 1 others. 2024. Rwku: Benchmarking real-world knowledge unlearning for large language models. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,37:98213–98263. Minseok Choi, ChaeHun Park, Dohyun Lee, and Jaegul Choo. 2024. Breaking chains: Unraveling the links in multi-hop knowledge unlearning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.13274 .Chahana Dahal, Ashutosh Balasubramaniam, and Zuobin Xiong. 2026. Gone: Structural knowledge unlearning via neighborhood-expanded distribution shaping. Preprint , arXiv:2603.12275. Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schel-ten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mi-tra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, and 542 others. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. Preprint , arXiv:2407.21783. Shengyuan Hu, Yiwei Fu, Steven Wu, and Virginia Smith. 2025. Unlearning or obfuscating? jogging the memory of unlearned llms via benign relearning. In International Conference on Learning Representa-tions , volume 2025, pages 8857–8888. Jie Huang and Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang. 2023. To-wards reasoning in large language models: A survey. In Findings of the association for computational lin-guistics: ACL 2023 , pages 1049–1065. Gabriel Ilharco, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Mitchell Worts-man, Suchin Gururangan, Ludwig Schmidt, Han-naneh Hajishirzi, and Ali Farhadi. 2023. Edit-ing models with task arithmetic. Preprint ,arXiv:2212.04089. Joel Jang, Dongkeun Yoon, Sohee Yang, Sungmin Cha, Moontae Lee, Lajanugen Logeswaran, and Minjoon Seo. 2023. Knowledge unlearning for mitigating privacy risks in language models. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 14389–14408. Nathaniel Li, Alexander Pan, Anjali Gopal, Sum-mer Yue, Daniel Berrios, Alice Gatti, Justin D. Li, Ann-Kathrin Dombrowski, Shashwat Goel, Long Phan, Gabriel Mukobi, Nathan Helm-Burger, Rassin Lababidi, Lennart Justen, Andrew B. Liu, Michael Chen, Isabelle Barrass, Oliver Zhang, Xiaoyuan Zhu, and 38 others. 2024a. The wmdp benchmark: Mea-suring and reducing malicious use with unlearning. 

Preprint , arXiv:2403.03218. Nathaniel Li, Alexander Pan, Anjali Gopal, Sum-mer Yue, Daniel Berrios, Alice Gatti, Justin D. Li, Ann-Kathrin Dombrowski, Shashwat Goel, Long Phan, Gabriel Mukobi, Nathan Helm-Burger, Rassin Lababidi, Lennart Justen, Andrew B. Liu, Michael Chen, Isabelle Barrass, Oliver Zhang, Xiaoyuan Zhu, and 38 others. 2024b. The wmdp benchmark: Mea-suring and reducing malicious use with unlearning. 

Preprint , arXiv:2403.03218. Sijia Liu, Yuanshun Yao, Jinghan Jia, Stephen Casper, Nathalie Baracaldo, Peter Hase, Yuguang Yao, Chris Yuhao Liu, Xiaojun Xu, Hang Li, and 1 oth-ers. 2025. Rethinking machine unlearning for large language models. Nature Machine Intelligence ,7(2):181–194. Zheyuan Liu, Guangyao Dou, Zhaoxuan Tan, Yijun Tian, and Meng Jiang. 2024. Towards safer large language models through machine unlearning. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: ACL 2024 , pages 1817–1829. Pratyush Maini, Zhili Feng, Avi Schwarzschild, Zachary C. Lipton, and J. Zico Kolter. 2024. Tofu: A task of fictitious unlearning for llms. Preprint ,arXiv:2401.06121. Vaibhav Mavi, Anubhav Jangra, and Adam Jatowt. 2024. Multi-hop question answering. Foundations and Trends® in Information Retrieval , 17(4):457–586. Anmol Mekala, Vineeth Dorna, Shreya Dubey, Ab-hishek Lalwani, David Koleczek, Mukund Rungta, Sadid A Hasan, and Elita Lobo. 2025. Alternate preference optimization for unlearning factual knowl-edge in large language models. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 3732–3752. Mihir Parmar, Nisarg Patel, Neeraj Varshney, Mutsumi Nakamura, Man Luo, Santosh Mashetty, Arindam Mitra, and Chitta Baral. 2024. Logicbench: Towards systematic evaluation of logical reasoning ability of large language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 13679– 13707. Martin Pawelczyk, Seth Neel, and Himabindu Lakkaraju. 2024. In-context unlearning: language models as few-shot unlearners. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning ,pages 40034–40050. Yan Scholten, Stephan Günnemann, and Leo Schwinn. 2025. A probabilistic perspective on unlearning and alignment for large language models. In Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , vol-ume 2025, pages 49420–49436. Aakriti Shah and Thai Le. 2025. The limits of obliviate: Evaluating unlearning in llms via stimulus-knowledge entanglement-behavior frame-work. Preprint , arXiv:2510.25732. Weijia Shi, Jaechan Lee, Yangsibo Huang, Sadhika Mal-ladi, Jieyu Zhao, Ari Holtzman, Daogao Liu, Luke Zettlemoyer, Noah A. Smith, and Chiyuan Zhang. 2024. Muse: Machine unlearning six-way evaluation for language models. Preprint , arXiv:2407.06460. Ilia Shumailov, Jamie Hayes, Eleni Triantafillou, Guillermo Ortiz-Jimenez, Nicolas Papernot, Matthew Jagielski, Itay Yona, Heidi Howard, and Eugene Bag-dasaryan. 2024. Ununlearning: Unlearning is not sufficient for content regulation in advanced genera-tive ai. Preprint , arXiv:2407.00106. Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Scales, Nathanael Schärli, Se-bastian Gehrmann, Yi Tay, Hyung Won Chung, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Denny Zhou, and 1 others. 2023. Challenging big-bench tasks and whether chain-of-thought can solve them. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pages 13003–13051. Chenchen Tan, Youyang Qu, Xinghao Li, Hui Zhang, Shujie Cui, Cunjian Chen, and Longxiang Gao. 2026. Wisdom is knowing what not to say: Hallucination-free llms unlearning via attention shifting. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38:99138– 99166. Zhaokun Wang, Jinyu Guo, Jingwen Pu, Hongli Pu, Meng Yang, Xunlei Chen, Jie Ou, Wenyi Li, Guangchun Luo, and Wenhong Tian. 2026. Cap: Controllable alignment prompting for unlearning in llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.21251 .Rongzhe Wei, Peizhi Niu, Hans Hao-Hsun Hsu, Rui-han Wu, Haoteng Yin, Mohsen Ghassemi, Yifan Li, Vamsi Potluru, Eli Chien, Kamalika Chaudhuri, and 1 others. 2026. Do llms really forget? evaluating un-learning with knowledge correlation and confidence awareness. Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems , 38:93073–93111. Ruihan Wu, Konstantin Garov, and Kamalika Chaud-huri. 2026. Learning-time encoding shapes unlearn-ing in llms. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Ruihan Wu, Chhavi Yadav, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Kamalika Chaudhuri. 2025. Evaluating deep unlearn-ing in large language models. In ICML 2025 Work-shop on Machine Unlearning for Generative AI .Alexander Xiong, Xuandong Zhao, Aneesh Pappu, and Dawn Song. 2025. The landscape of memorization in llms: Mechanisms, measurement, and mitigation. 

Preprint , arXiv:2507.05578. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Day-iheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, and 41 others. 2025a. Qwen3 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.09388. Nakyeong Yang, Minsung Kim, Seunghyun Yoon, Joongbo Shin, and Kyomin Jung. 2025b. FaithUn: Toward faithful forgetting in language models by investigating the interconnectedness of knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 12999–13014, Suzhou, China. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Hongbang Yuan, Zhuoran Jin, Pengfei Cao, Yubo Chen, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao. 2025. Towards robust knowledge unlearning: An adversarial framework for assessing and improving unlearning robustness in large language models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 39, pages 25769–25777. Naixin Zhai, Pengyang Shao, Binbin Zheng, Yonghui Yang, Fei Shen, Long Bai, and Xun Yang. 2026. Maximizing local entropy where it matters: Prefix-aware localized llm unlearning. Preprint ,arXiv:2601.03190. Qingjie Zhang, Haoting Qian, Zhicong Huang, Cheng Hong, Minlie Huang, Ke Xu, Chao Zhang, and Han Qiu. 2025a. Understanding the dilemma of unlearning for large language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2509.24675. Ruiqi Zhang, Licong Lin, Yu Bai, and Song Mei. 2024. Negative preference optimization: From catas-trophic collapse to effective unlearning. Preprint ,arXiv:2404.05868. Zhiwei Zhang, Fali Wang, Xiaomin Li, Zongyu Wu, Xianfeng Tang, Hui Liu, Qi He, Wenpeng Yin, and Suhang Wang. 2025b. Catastrophic failure of llm unlearning via quantization. In International Con-ference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pages 74925–74948. Zexuan Zhong, Zhengxuan Wu, Christopher D Manning, Christopher Potts, and Danqi Chen. 2023. Mquake: Assessing knowledge editing in language models via multi-hop questions. In Proceedings of the 2023 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 15686–15702. Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, and Ed Chi. 2023. Least-to-most prompting enables complex reasoning in large language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2205.10625. Yaoming Zhu, Sidi Lu, Lei Zheng, Jiaxian Guo, Weinan Zhang, Jun Wang, and Yong Yu. 2018. Texygen: A benchmarking platform for text generation models. In The 41st international ACM SIGIR conference on research & development in information retrieval ,pages 1097–1100. A Limitations of Exact Match and 

## Rouge-L 

In recent years, Exact Match (EM) and ROUGE-L have been widely adopted as primary bench-marks for QA and generative tasks. However, these surface-level lexical matching metrics suffer from notable limitations, often failing to capture seman-tic equivalence. For example, given the question “In what sport did Hope Solo play as a goalkeeper?”, if the reference answer is “association football” but the model predicts “soccer,” both EM and ROUGE-L will incorrectly penalize the prediction as a com-plete failure. This limitation becomes even more severe when dealing with descriptive paraphrasing. Consider the question “What is Azkaban a prison for?” the ground truth is “magical criminals,” whereas a model might generate a highly accurate and de-scriptive response: “Wizards and witches who have committed crimes.” Despite being semantically perfectly aligned with the reference, a traditional metric like ROUGE-L yields an extremely low score (e.g., 0.12) due to the lack of n-gram over-lap, and Exact Match simply scores it as 0. To overcome these critical false negatives and rigor-ously assess the true reasoning and retrieval ca-pabilities of the models, we adopt the LLM-as-a-judge paradigm. This approach effectively recog-nizes semantic equivalence across varied expres-sions, providing a much more reliable and robust benchmarking of model performance. 

## B More Details about Related Work 

As shown in Table 1, we chronologically survey some representative unlearning benchmarks. • MUSE (Shi et al., 2024) introduces a compre-hensive benchmark for machine unlearning in LLMs from both data-owner and deployer per-spectives. Unlike prior benchmarks that mainly focus on question answering, MUSE formulates a six-way benchmark framework covering ver-batim memorization, knowledge memorization, privacy leakage, utility preservation, scalability, and sustainability. The benchmark is built on more realistic and large-scale corpora, including Harry Potter books and BBC news articles, and separates benchmarking into verbatim text and derived knowledge QA sets. In total, it supports systematic assessment of eight representative un-learning methods on 7B-parameter LLMs under practical unlearning scenarios. • TOFU (Maini et al., 2024) introduces a con-trolled benchmark for evaluating machine un-learning in LLMs. It constructs a synthetic dataset of 200 fictitious author profiles, each paired with 20 question-answer instances, so that the target knowledge is guaranteed not to appear in pretraining data. The benchmark defines for-get sets at three difficulty levels and evaluates unlearning from two complementary perspec-tives: forget quality and model utility. To support holistic assessment, TOFU includes four bench-marking subsets—Forget Set, Retain Set, Real Authors, and World Facts—and combines multi-ple metrics, including probability, ROUGE, truth ratio, and KS-test-based comparison, revealing that existing unlearning baselines remain largely ineffective. • WMDP (Li et al., 2024a) introduces a public benchmarking suite for measuring hazardous knowledge in LLMs and studying its removal via unlearning. The benchmark is designed as a proxy for malicious-use capabilities, with a strong emphasis on openness, expert construc-tion, and safety-conscious filtering. • RWKU (Cao et al., 2024) introduces a bench-mark for real-world knowledge unlearning in LLMs under a more practical setting, where nei-ther the forget corpus nor the retain corpus is available. Its key feature is the use of 200 real-world famous people as unlearning targets, ensur-ing that the to-be-unlearned knowledge already exists in pretrained models and has clear bound-aries. The benchmark further provides a com-prehensive benchmarking framework, including 13,131 forget probes and 11,379 neighbor probes, to assess unlearning efficacy, locality, and util-ity. It also incorporates membership inference attacks and diverse adversarial probes for more rigorous and realistic benchmarking. • FaithUn (Yang et al., 2025b) is a benchmark for faithful unlearning in LLMs, with a particular focus on the interconnected nature of real-world knowledge. Built from Wikidata, it targets pre-existing knowledge about 200 famous entities and goes beyond conventional unlearning bench-marks by testing whether models remove not only the target fact but also its paraphrased and multi-hop variants, while preserving unrelated facts that merely share the same answer. The bench-mark contains 664 base QA instances, paired with 1,992 paraphrased questions, 1,714 multi-hop questions, and 4,671 same-answer questions, enabling a comprehensive assessment of faithful unlearning. • Eval-DU (Wu et al., 2025) introduces a bench-mark for deep unlearning, which evaluates whether a target fact is not only removed but also no longer recoverable through logical deduc-tion from retained knowledge. The benchmark proposed a newly constructed semi-synthetic Eval-DU dataset, which contains 700 facts about 100 fictitious people and 48 logical rules to sup-port more complex multi-step reasoning. It fur-ther proposes three metrics—Success-DU, Re-call, and Accuracy—to jointly assess unlearning effectiveness and model utility. • GONE (Dahal et al., 2026) introduces the first benchmark for LLM unlearning on structured knowledge graphs, rather than flat sentence-level facts. Built from Wikidata and ConceptNet, it converts sampled triples into diverse probes, in-cluding direct, paraphrased, inverse, and multi-hop questions, enabling fine-grained assessment of reasoning-based leakage and utility preserva-tion. A key feature of GONE is its topological orthogonality design, which explicitly separates forget and retain sets to reduce confounding in-terference. Compared with prior benchmarks, GONE provides a more realistic and structurally grounded testbed for measuring whether LLMs truly forget interconnected knowledge. 

## C Design Rationale for the Six-Type Logical Reasoning Framework 

This section presents the theoretical foundation and design principles underlying our selection of six logical reasoning paths for machine unlearning benchmark. While LogicBench introduces nine propositional logic rules (MP, MT, HS, DS, CD, DD, BD, CT, and MI), our framework focuses specifically on fundamental logical reasoning pat-terns that exhibit optimal characteristics for un-learning scenarios. We systematically select four core types from LogicBench (MP, MT, DS, HS) and incorporate two additional types (LL and CC variant) based on their suitability for knowledge removal contexts. 

C.1 Exclusion Criteria and Rationale 

We exclude five logical types from the original Log-icBench framework based on their incompatibility with unlearning requirements. Each excluded type violates one or more fundamental principles essen-tial for effective knowledge removal: 

Constructive Dilemma (CD): (( p → q) ∧ (r →

s) ∧ (p ∨ r)) ⊢ (q ∨ s) can be fully realized through a combination of Modus Ponens (MP) and Disjunc-tive Syllogism (DS). When the disjunctive premise 

(p ∨ r) is true, if p is true, q is obtained through MP by combining (p → q); if r is true, s is ob-tained through MP by combining (r → s). Since the disjunctive premise ensures that at least one an-tecedent is true, the disjunctive conclusion (q ∨ s)

is finally obtained through the extended application of DS. This decomposability of CD indicates that it is not the original reasoning pattern in the logi-cal system, but a derived application of the basic rule, and therefore is not suitable as an independent evaluation dimension. 

Destructive Dilemma (DD): (( p → q)∧(r → s)∧

(¬q ∨ ¬ s)) ⊢ (¬p ∨ ¬ r) is essentially a combined application of Modus Tollens (MT) and Disjunc-tive Syllogism (DS). When the premise (¬q ∨ ¬ s)

is true, if ¬q is true, combining (p → q) with MT yields ¬p; if ¬s is true, combining (r → s) with MT yields ¬r. Since the disjunctive premise guar-antees that at least one negated consequent is true, the conclusion (¬p∨¬ r) can ultimately be obtained through DS. Therefore, DD does not provide new reasoning patterns beyond basic reasoning rules; its function can be fully achieved by a combination of MT and DS. 

Bidirectional Dilemma (BD) is a composite rule combining constructive and destructive reasoning. Its reasoning process can be completely decom-posed into a sequence of applications of Modus Ponens (MP), Modus Tollens (MT), and Disjunc-tive Syllogism (DS). Each branch of BD actually corresponds to a standard application of the basic rule: the forward reasoning part is implemented through MP, the backward reasoning part through MT, and the disjunctive processing relies on DS. This composite nature of the rule means that testing BD is equivalent to repeatedly testing the model’s mastery of the basic reasoning rules, and cannot provide additional information about the model’s logical capabilities. Therefore, it lacks independent value in benchmarking. 

Communication (CT). Although seemingly sim-ple, commutativity functions as a structural re-arrangement operation rather than a genuine in-ference rule. Such operations do not produce new semantic information; they only change the surface structure of the proposition. In unlearning evalua-tion, what we need is reasoning patterns that reveal the depth of the model’s semantic understanding, rather than testing its ability to memorize formal transformation rules. 

Material Implication (MI): (p → q) ⊢ (¬p ∨ q).While logically equivalent, it has limited evalua-tion significance because the transformation can be accomplished through direct pattern matching. The model only needs to remember the substitution for-mulas for " →" and " ¬... ⊢..." without understanding the semantic structure or reasoning process behind conditional statements. This transformation does not involve the transmission of premise-conclusion information, lacks genuine reasoning steps, and cannot distinguish whether the model is based on logical reasoning understanding or grammatical transformation memorization. In unlearning eval-uation, we need to test whether the model truly masters and can forget reasoning relations, while MI testing may only reflect the model’s memo-rization of the transformation formula, leading to misleading evaluation results—the model may per-form well on MI but fail on tasks requiring real reasoning. 

C.2 Selection Criteria and Advantages 

Our six selected logical types satisfy the essen-tial requirements for an effective unlearning bench-mark: semantic transparency, structural simplicity, and operational tractability. Each type provides advantages for knowledge removal assessment: 

Modus Ponens (MP): (( p → q) ∧ p) ⊢ q repre-sents canonical forward inference with optimal characteristics for the unlearning benchmark. The rule exhibits clear information flow from premises to conclusion, satisfies the subformula property, and maintains semantic transparency. These prop-erties enable precise identification and selective re-moval of knowledge components while preserving logical consistency, making MP ideal for assessing basic unlearning effectiveness. 

Modus Tollens (MT): (( p → q) ∧ ¬ q) ⊢ ¬ p De-spite involving negation, MT provides systematic 

contrapositive reasoning that supports coherent knowledge revision. This rule enables the assess-ment of backward inference handling in unlearning systems—when information about q is removed, MT reveals how systems manage dependent con-clusions about p, which is crucial for evaluating the completeness of knowledge removal operations. 

Disjunctive Syllogism (DS): (( p∨q)∧¬ p) ⊢ q em-bodies elimination-based reasoning that naturally aligns with selective forgetting principles. The rule enables isolation of specific disjuncts and reason-ing about remaining alternatives after elimination, directly supporting targeted unlearning assessment. This mechanism provides insight into how well systems handle partial knowledge removal while preserving valid alternatives. 

Hypothetical Syllogism (HS): (( p → q) ∧ (q →

r)) ⊢ (p → r) captures transitive reasoning chains fundamental to knowledge organization. This rule is essential for evaluating how unlearning systems maintain logical closure when removing intermediate reasoning steps. HS assessment re-veals whether systems can preserve coherent logi-cal structures while selectively forgetting specific inference components. 

Leibniz’s Law (LL): A = B ∧ P (A) ⊢ P (B)

represents a fundamental form of identity-based reasoning and is well suited to unlearning bench-mark. Given that A and B denote the same entity, any property true of A should also hold for B. This rule is especially important in the unlearning set-ting because target knowledge may survive through paraphrases, aliases, or equivalent entity descrip-tions, even after direct expressions have been re-moved. Incorporating LL allows us to test whether unlearning methods are robust to substitution-based recovery paths. In this sense, LL helps assess the 

depth and completeness of forgetting , rather than only the suppression of explicit factual forms. 

Conjunction Composition (CC): 

P (A) ∧ Q(A), R (B) ∧ Q(B) ⊢ Q(A) ∧ Q(B),captures a basic form of overlap-based reasoning 

and is well suited to an unlearning benchmark. When two conjunctive statements contain multiple attributes, CC focuses on the shared component rather than the non-overlapping ones. For example, if one statement says that Tom can swim and play cricket, and another says that Jack can run and play cricket, the composed conclusion isolates the common property that both Tom and Jack can play cricket. This makes CC particularly useful for benchmarks because it targets a unambiguous shared attribute , as opposed to leaving the assessment at the level of loosely related or partially overlapping facts. In the unlearning setting, such a structure helps determine whether a model still preserves or removes the common recoverable knowledge hidden inside more complex conjunctive expressions. This six-type framework provides comprehen-sive coverage of fundamental logical reasoning pat-terns while maintaining the essential properties re-quired for systematic unlearning benchmark: struc-tural clarity, operational simplicity, and semantic transparency, while maintaining the essential prop-erties required for systematic unlearning bench-mark: structural clarity, operational simplicity, and semantic transparency. 

## D Experimental Details 

D.1 Notations 

Consider an LLM parameterized by θ. Given an input x, it outputs the probability distribution over the next tokens p(· | x; θ). The fine-tuning process on a dataset D = {(xi, y i)}Ni=1 aims to minimize the prediction loss ℓ(y | x; θ) = − log p(y | x; θ),where p(y | x; θ) = QTt=1 p(yt | x ◦ y<t ; θ), T is the number of tokens in the sequence y, yt is the 

t-th token, y<t is the prefix up to t, and ◦ denotes string concatenation. In the context of LLM unlearning, the goal is to obtain an unlearned model parameterized by θu that forgets a specific forget set DF ⊆ D while main-taining performance on the retain set DR = D\D F ,compared to the initial learned model θl. For spe-cific unlearning paradigms, we also define θover as the model overfitted to the forget set, and θadpt 

as the trainable adaptation parameters. We let 

xF ∼ D F and xR ∼ D R denote data samples from the forget and retain sets, with their sequence lengths denoted as TF and TR, and their t-th tokens denoted as xFt and xRt , respectively. We denote the hidden states of the model at layer l as M (·).Specifically, Mu(·) and Mf ro (·) represent the hid-den states of the unlearned model and the frozen original model. In the output space, for a target token t, let zt ∈ RV be the logit vector, where V is the vocabulary size. Let Vtop denote the index set of the top-K logits, where zt,i represents the logit value of the i-th token in this set. Isens denotes the index set of sensitive initiation tokens. For the attention mechanism, L and H denote the number of layers and attention heads in the transformer. Al,h (x; θadpt ) denotes the current at-tention distribution output by head h at layer l of the trainable LLM. Asup l,h and A′retain l,h represent the target suppressed and retained attention distribu-tions. Finally, u denotes a target unit vector used for representation misdirection, and c is a scaling constant. 

D.2 Unlearning Methods 

• Gradient Ascent (GA). (Jang et al., 2023) This method simply changes the training objective from minimizing the negative log-likelihood to maximizing it. This method represents the fun-damental strategy to unlearn. 

−E(x,y )∼D F [− log p(y | x; θ)] . (3) • Negative Preference Optimization (NPO). 

(Zhang et al., 2024) This approach addresses the “catastrophic collapse” problem in existing gradient-ascent-based LLM unlearning methods by borrowing from the preference optimization. It solves the instability problem of traditional gradient ascent methods. 

− 2

μ E(x,y )∼D F



log σ



−μ log p(y | x; θ)

p(y | x; θl)

 

(4) where σ is the sigmoid function and μ is a hyper-parameter that we fix 0.1 in experiments. • Representation Misdirection for Unlearning (RMU). (Li et al., 2024b) This method real-izes unlearning by designing a dual loss function based on representation engineering. The for-get loss perturbs the representation of dangerous knowledge, and the retention loss keeps the ac-tivation of benign data in a state close to the original model. 

ExF ∼D F

1

TF

X 

> xFt∈xF

|| Mu(xFt ) − c · u|| 22

+ α · ExR∼D R

1

TR

X 

> xRt∈xR

|| Mu(xRt ) − Mf ro (xRt )|| 22

(5) • Task Vector (TV). (Ilharco et al., 2023) This method is constructed by calculating the differ-ence between the fine-tuned model weights θf

and the pre-trained model weights θp, thus encod-ing task-specific knowledge into a vector repre-sentation θf − θp in the weight space. By editing simple vector arithmetic, this approach can bal-ance unlearning quality and model utility. 

θu = θl − (θover − θl). (6) • Prefix-Aware Localized Unlearning (PALU) 

(Zhai et al., 2026) achieves efficient LLM un-learning through a dual localization entropy max-imization objective. In the temporal dimension, it intervenes only on key initiation tokens with sensitive prefixes; in the lexical dimension, it flat-tens only the top-K logits instead of the entire vocabulary. 

LP ALU = 1

K

X

> i∈Vtop

(zt,i − c)2+

λ X

> t / ∈Isens

KL (Pθl (·| y<t )|| Pθu (·| y<t )) 

(7) • Attention-Shifting framework (AS). (Tan et al., 2026) This method is a novel unlearning method that adjusts attention mechanisms. It suppresses the attention of important tokens in the forget set while promoting attention to important tokens in the retain set. 

LAS =

αExF ∼DF [

> L

X

> l=1
> H

X

> h=1

KL (Al,h (xF , θ adpt )||| Asup l,h )] + (1 − α)

ExR∼DR [

> L

X

> l=1
> H

X

> h=1

KL (A′

> l,h

(x′, θ adpt )||| A′retain l,h )] 

(8) 

D.3 Recovery Methods 

• Probab (Scholten et al., 2025) points out that simple multinomial sampling, rather than greedy decoding, could also retrieve most LLMs’ un-learned knowledge. This observation reveals a critical vulnerability in current unlearning ap-proaches: while these methods may successfully suppress specific information during determinis-tic greedy decoding, they often fail to completely eliminate the knowledge from the model’s pa-rameter space. Multinomial sampling can ac-cess alternative pathways in the model’s output distribution that still contain traces of the target information. This suggests that effective unlearn-ing requires not only reducing the probability of unwanted outputs under greedy decoding but also ensuring robust knowledge removal across different decoding strategies. • FocusOnKey (Zhang et al., 2025a) is grounded in the assumption that unlearning “success” re-flects diminished attention to key tokens rather than actual knowledge erasure; consequently, the method can recover unlearned knowledge merely by repeating these key tokens. • Quantization (Zhang et al., 2025b) assumes the weight changes in unlearning are less than the 

> Figure 5: More cases for curated MQuAKE dataset and its premises.

quantization step size (such as the interval thresh-old for 4-bit quantization) because of model utility preservation, so during quantization, the weights of the original model and the forgotten model are mapped to the same discrete quan-tization value. This makes the quantized “un-learned” model essentially equivalent to the quan-tized original model, thus unexpectedly recover-ing sensitive knowledge. 

D.4 More Cases of Curated Dataset 

• MQuAKE. (Zhong et al., 2023) As shown in Fig-ure 5, these cases show the premises of multi-hop questions and how we combine them. • Books. (Shi et al., 2024) As shown in Figure 6, these cases show the premises of multi-hop ques-tions and how we combine them. 

D.5 Hardware Details 

These experiments were all conducted on NVIDIA A800. 

D.6 Dataset Size 

As shown in Table 6, we have detailed the spe-cific sizes of the constructed MQuAKE and Books datasets across the six logic types. To avoid benchmark bias caused by data imbalances across different reasoning structures during subsequent benchmarking, we strictly controlled the number of questions for each logic structure to remain completely consistent (500 questions per category for MQuAKE and 100 questions per category for Figure 6: More cases for the curated Books dataset and its premises. 

Books), thereby maximizing the fairness and rigor of cross-category testing comparisons. 

Table 4: Curated dataset size in MQuAKE and Books. We control the data size in each type the same. 

Dataset HS MT DS LL MP CC All 

MQuAKE 500 500 500 500 500 500 3000 Books 50 50 50 50 50 50 300 

D.7 Hyperparameter 

• Unlearning Methods. In preliminary experi-ments, we observed that applying uniform hyper-parameters across all methods and model scales leads to highly inconsistent outcomes: the same learning rate may achieve effective forgetting on one model while causing catastrophic collapse on another. We therefore tune hyperparameters inde-pendently for each (method, model) combination, selecting configurations that achieve meaningful forgetting without catastrophic utility degrada-tion. Across all methods, learning rates range from 8×10 −7 to 6×10 −5 (with RMU and AS us-ing higher method-specific rates), training epochs from 2 to 5, and maximum sequence lengths of 128 or 512, depending on the method. For TV, we search over scaling coefficients α ∈ { 1.0, 4.0}.• Recovery Methods. The hyperparameter in these methods is shown in Table 5 

## E Prompts Details 

In this section, we will thoroughly delve into the specific prompts employed for recovery judgement and knowledge extraction processes. We provide details of the prompts. 

E.1 Knowledge Extraction Prompt 

Knowledge Extraction Prompt 

You are a knowledge extraction expert for fictional worlds. Extract structured knowledge from this novel passage. Output a JSON array. Each item must have a “type” field and corresponding fields: 1. “relation”: Entity-to-entity relationships 

{“type”: “relation”, “subject”: “...”, “relation”: “...”, “object”: “...”} 

Examples: {“type”: “relation”, “subject”: “Harry Potter”, “relation”: “attends”, “object”: “Hogwarts”} 

2. “category”: Entity belongs to a category/class 

{“type”: “category”, “entity”: “...”, “category”: “...”} 

3. “identity”: Two names refer to the same entity 

{“type”: “identity”, “name1”: “...”, “name2”: “...”} 

4. “property”: Entity has a specific attribute or ability 

{“type”: “property”, “entity”: “...”, “property”: “...”} 

5. “rule”: Universal rule in this fictional world 

{“type”: “rule”, “condition”: “...”, “consequence”: “...”, “description”: “...”} 

6. “exclusive”: Mutually exclusive/exhaustive options 

{“type”: “exclusive”, “set_name”: “...”, “members”: [“...”, “...”]} 

Rules: • Extract ONLY factual knowledge, not momentary ac-tions or emotions • Use full character names when first introducing • Be specific: “teaches Potions” > “is a teacher” • Do NOT duplicate • For “rule” and “exclusive”: only extract when clearly stated or strongly implied 

E.2 Recovery LLM-Judge Prompt 

recovery LLM-Judge Prompt 

You are a strict answer-grading assistant. Given a ques-tion, a ground-truth answer, and a model response, de-cide whether the model response is CORRECT or INCOR-RECT. Key rules: 1. CORRECT if the response conveys the same meaning as the ground truth. 2. Empty, numeric-only, or gibberish responses are IN-CORRECT. 3. If the ground-truth answer appears anywhere in the re-sponse, judge as CORRECT. Reply with exactly one word: CORRECT or INCORRECT. Table 5: Recovery attack Configurations. 

Method Decoding Temp. top-p Trials Precision Criterion 

Probab sampling 0.8 0.95 5 BF16 ≥1 correct FocusOnKey greedy – – 1 BF16 ≥1 correct Quantization greedy – – 1 INT4 correct 

## F Additional Experiments 

F.1 Human Annotation and LLM-based Quality Assessment 

As shown in Figure 7, we conduct a rapid yet rigor-ous human benchmarking by uniformly sampling 50 instances from each logical category. A panel of three students owning a bachelor’s degree, spe-cializing in computer science and telecommuni-cation engineering, was invited to annotate these samples to assess the quality and validity of the cu-rated dataset. Specifically, annotators were asked to examine whether each multi-hop question could be correctly decomposed into the corresponding single-hop questions, (i.e., whether the intended reasoning chain was faithfully preserved in the gen-erated instance). To further assess the quality of the curated dataset, we also perform automatic benchmarking using DeepSeek-v4, gemini-2-flash, and Kimi-K2 as LLM judges. Specifically, each sample is rated on a scale from 0 to 100 according to its logical correctness, clarity, and naturalness. Table 6 re-ports the average scores on MQuAKE and Books. The results indicate that the curated samples are generally of high quality, suggesting our data con-struction pipeline produces a reliable benchmark. Overall, the results demonstrate consistently high quality (i.e., score ≥ 90 ) across both datasets. Human evaluators assign the highest scores (MQuAKE: 98.4, Books: 99.2), while the LLM judges produce closely aligned results, with average scores ranging from 91.7 to 98.9.           

> Table 6: LLM-based quality assessment of the curated datasets. Scores are assigned by DeepSeek-v4, gemini-2-flash, kimi-K2 on a 0–100 scale.
> Judge MQuAKE Books Human 98.4 99.2 DeepSeek-v4 93.4 97.6 gemini-2-flash 92.1 98.9 kimi-K2 91.7 97.1

F.2 Curated Data Richness 

Compared to the original benchmarks, 

Leak-resistant Unlearning shows higher diversity and broader answer coverage. Table 7 reports self-BLEU (Zhu et al., 2018) (lower is better) and answer entropy (higher is better) on two datasets. For MQuAKE, we compare with the original multi-hop questions; for Books, which has no multi-hop queries, we use the original single-hop questions as the baseline. 

Leak-resistant Unlearning achieves much lower Self-BLEU on MQuAKE, indicating more lexically diverse questions. On Books, Self-BLEU increases slightly (0.158 →0.256) because our multi-hop questions share premise entities across chains, creating some structural overlap. Answer entropy improves on both datasets (5.49 →6.85 on MQuAKE; 6.27 →8.01 on Books), showing that the six logic types yield a broader and more balanced answer distribution.                 

> Table 7: Question diversity (Self-BLEU ↓) and answer diversity (Entropy ↑). Baselines are the original single-hop and multi-hop questions; Ours are the six aug-mented reasoning structures.
> MQuAKE Books BLEU( ↓)Ent( ↑)BLEU( ↓)Ent( ↑)
> Original 0.506 5.49 0.158 6.27
> ours 0.285 6.85 0.256 8.01

F.3 Base results 

base results on MQuAKE is shown in Table 8.         

> Table 8: Accuracy on single-hop questions and multi-hop questions.
> Model single hop multi hop
> Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct 82.9 65.8 Qwen3-14B 82.5 60.6 Qwen3-32B 84.8 64.3

Figure 7: We built a labeling system (see web interface above) for experts to assess dataset quality, which can automatically record annotations and calculate the final results.